---
title: "My impression of the marketing around mechanical keyboard switches"
excerpt: "Satirical post about the kind of marketing that defines the mechanical keyboard switch market."
---

This is a caricature of how I feel mechanical keyboard switches are
being marketed these days. I do not mean to judge anybody and I am
having a good time learning about all the options out there, while
typing on my boring Cherry Black switches. Have fun!

## XGF Mixed Signal buttery and coarse switch

XGF have done it again with another banger of a design! _Mixed Signal_
holds nothing back in terms of tactility. The bump comes right at the
start of the force-travel curve and extends all the way to the end at
the unusual 3mm mark. Expect the affair to be short and bumpy
throughout.

The top housing is made out of exclusive UOM blend, which industry
insiders affirm is tougher than polycarbonate. The bottom housing
stands at the opposite end of the spectrum with its patented "Easy
Peasy" composition. Collisions on each key press thus produce a
distinct sound signature that oscillates between buttery smoothness
and crunching coarseness.

## Tipsy Hidden Claptrap slippery slope switch

Tipsy switches are highly rated in enthusiast circles owning to their
celebrated "thlatch" sound profile. _Hidden Claptrap_ has earned all
its plaudits through its brilliant performance since its release this
past summer.

The best-in-class lubrication method of Tipsy ensures that the leaf,
stem, and spring are bathed in the finest industrial oils. The linear
feedback is smooth and slippery as an eel.

The stem pole is long, creating a noticeable bottom out event at
3.9mm. The switch housings are carved out of secret TLP material,
which is optimised to contribute to the peerless "schlushness" of the
thing.

## K9 Yappy Puppy high pitched switch

K9 remind us why they remain the indisputable authority in the niche
of "slinky" aesthetics. _Yappy Puppy_ follows in the footsteps of
modern classics like _Flamboyant Chihuahua_ (loud "kratsch" effect)
and _Docile Werewolf_ (silent "dling").

The robust scissor cut internals have the unmistakable effect of
sharpening the stem as the switch is broken in. The shortened travel
distance of 3.4mm combined with the early actuation point at 1.2mm
make for a snappy typing experience.

Compared to K9's other offerings from this year's lineup, _Yappy
Puppy_ has more "beleh" than _Boisterous Jackal_ and less "thung" than
_Irate Bear_.

## Bonus: innovative NIH keycap profile

In collaboration with Santa's elves, our engineers have spent the last
half decade reverse engineering the moulds of the esteemed Lettuce
profile in order to gain intimate knowledge of its subtle flaws.

The result of their tireless endeavours is a masterpiece of
originality: NIH. Compared to Lettuce, the top row is 1mm shorter on
the bottom side with a slightly less acute angle at the edges,
facilitating faster roll motions. The spacebar is marginally more
concave, boosting comfort for typists and gamers alike. Legends are
exactly 0.0001489% more compact than Lettuce, making them crisp and
highly legible. There is no part of the process we did not consider
thoroughly, while painstakingly going through these technical details.

We are proud to bring such a unique design to market and are confident
you will combine it with one of the aforementioned trailblazing
switches to reach endgame levels of "klong" in your new weekly build.
