---
title: "Thoughts on the Cherry MX2A Silent Black switches"
excerpt: "I am very happy with the Silent Blacks as part of my split mechanical keyboard. They meet all my expectations."
---

[ I am not affiliated with any of the companies I mention and I am not providing any links just to be sure. ]

I have been using the titular switches full time for the past ~3 weeks. They are the culmination of my evolving preferences with mechanical keyboards. Namely, (i) linear feedback, (ii) medium to heavy weight, (iii) steep force curve, (iv) sufficiently quiet, (v) barely noticeable stem wobble, and (vi) reasonably smooth out-of-the-box.

When I switched to a split mechanical keyboard a bit more than a year ago (the _Iris_ revision 8 model by _Keebio_), I gravitated through trials and errors towards linear and lightweight switches, specifically the _Keychron K Pro Silver_. Their low operating force made it easier for me to type without hurting my hands. Over time, and while recovering from repetitive strain injury, I noticed how my fingers were applying increasingly more pressure to the switch, so I decided to switch to the _Gateron G Pro 3.0 Yellow_ switches. Those are heavier than the _Silvers_, though not by much. I merrily used the _Yellows_ for a few months. In the meantime, I regained the strength in my fingers and I naturally kept increasing the force I was applying to each key press. I thus decided to buy the even heavier _Silent Blacks_.

The _Yellows_ offered me a fine typing experience overall. Their medium weight helps minimise accidental key presses while not compromising on the ease of typing. I think that they are an excellent starting point for anyone wanting to experiment with a linear switch. I could not notice any scratch in the key stroke and was accurate with my key presses. What I never got used to though was their rather high-pitched sound and noticeable stem wobble. The bottom out noise produced by the _Yellows_ is especially loud for my taste. This was also a subjective weakness of the _Silvers_, though at the time I was not applying enough pressure to trigger a bottom out event frequently enough.

It is why I wanted a switch with a high bottom out force: to not reach that point and, whenever I would reach it, to not do so with a lot of excess force. Put differently, my experience with the _Silent Blacks_ is that of a cushioned bottom out event. When it happens, it is comfortable rather than being an abrupt crash against the plate of the keyboard. I retain my momentum as I type and never feel like I have to slow down.

As their name suggests, the _Silent Blacks_ are designed to stay quiet. No mechanical switch will ever be absolutely silent, such as how a phone's keyboard is when the volume is at zero. The _Silent Blacks_ are quiet enough to not be calling for my attention while I am typing. In fact, now that I am trying to notice what I am hearing, the fan of the computer and the birds outside are louder than my typing. Great! No distractions for me and for the forms of life all around me. Because of the silencing mechanism built into the switch, the bottom out event does not provide the audible feedback of a standard linear switch, like that of the _Yellows_ and the _Silvers_. To me, this is exactly what I want, though it is worth pointing out for users of linear switches who have gotten used to that unmistakable sound.

In terms of smoothness, the _Silent Blacks_ are a bit more scratchy than the _Yellows_. This is barely felt while typing. I can only sense the scratch when I press a key off centre and do it slowly. Such is not a real world scenario though and I will thus dismiss it as irrelevant to my experience.

The force curve of the _Silent Blacks_ is steep, much like that of the _Yellows_. This means that the bottom out force is clearly higher than the actuation force. Whereas the _Silvers_ have a fairly flat curve: the force post-actuation is practically constant (it probably increases by a little, but I cannot notice it while typing). The difference between the _Silent Blacks_ and the _Yellows_ in this regard is in terms of the force values, with the former being heaving at all stages. From what I find online, the _Yellows_ actuate at ~50gf and bottom out at 67gf, while what I get for the _Silent Blacks_ is ~60gf and 85gf, respectively. While I do not have the means to verify these values myself, I can tell empirically that the _Silent Blacks_ are much heavier to the touch.

Stylistically, the _Silent Blacks_ I got come in an opaque housing, which is black in colour. These switches would make for a poor fit in a build that is designed around backlight effects, as they inhibit light coming through the keycaps. I disabled that effect a long time ago and my caps are not shine-through anyway. I do not really care how a switch looks as I am not staring at the keyboard while typing. For what it is worth though, the all-black appearance appeals to me. But again, I would not mind if they were styled using some flamboyant colour combination: what I care about is the performance while typing.

I have read about the difference the housing materials make, such as how nylon produces different sounds than polycarbonate. Though I do not have a large enough sample size to make useful comparisons. Is nylon contributing to the low noise coming out of the _Silent Blacks_? Is the polycarbonate top housing of the _Yellows_ and the _Silvers_ partly responsible for their fairly loud audible feedback? I cannot tell unless I control for that factor.

In conclusion, I am happy with the Cherry MX2A Silent Black switches. They meet all my expectations as they feature everything I have been working towards over the course of 1+ year with a split mechanical keyboard. My preferences have evolved to reflect my recovery post-injury. I am now at a point where I enjoy typing as (i) there is no pain anymore and (ii) the keyboard is optimised for my sensitivities and is thus comfortable---indeed fun---to use.
