---
title: Notes on the Thinkable
excerpt: A series of logicophilosophical notes examining the hypothesis that the thought of the thing is not the thing as such.
redirect_from: /notes-on-the-thinkable-2-0/
---

## Prior remarks

**i. About:** What is presented in this document is a preliminary
examination of the hypothesis that the thought of the thing is not the
thing as such. The Notes on the Thinkable, Version 2.0 is a modest,
limited in scope, contribution to first philosophy and epistemology.

**ii. Disclaimer:** A collection of notes can hardly avoid representing
anything but a mere effort to draw clear delineations between a number
of concepts peculiar to what may be the two magnitudes of an otherwise
singular reality: the world and the thinkable.

**iii. Value:** What the reader may find of value in this corpus of text
is a great unknown, at least in an ex ante sense. For the present author
though, its importance rests in its capacity to document ideas now held;
ideas that are susceptible to change, scrutiny, critique and
refinement. At bottom, the creation and publication of the Notes, of
this second version, is evidence of the willingness to abandon or to
overcome one’s considerations in favour of better, more cogent
arguments, to be formulated by the self or be propounded by others.

## Notes on the Thinkable

1 The world appears through thought.

1.1 The world is the totality of all there is and can be. Being is
indeterminable existence, while mode is its determinable
manifestation. A given mode of being is a presence.

1.2 The thinkable is the totality of all that is thought and can be
thought. An object of thought first occurs as an impression. Objects of
thought are generated by external or internal stimuli, which correspond
to experience and intellect respectively. An impression that derives
from experience is a representation of the thing thus experienced;
whereas an impression of a thing that springs from the intellect is an
imagination.

1.3 All that is thought of the world, is all that the world is thought
to be. The impression of the thing is not the thing as such, unless it
only exists as an imagination. What exists in the world is so
independent of its representation, though it is by becoming thinkable
that it is conceived as existing and it is only as thinkable that it
appears in the way that it does and to the extent of which it does.

1.4 Mode implies that every object of thought performs a function and
has an end in a context. The basic configurations of function and end
allow for the categorisation of objects of thought into any of the three
figures of the thinkable, namely the absolute, the monad and the
composite. The absolute is that which encompasses all possible functions
and ends of the thing outside any given context. The monad is that which
is ascribed to a specific function or end prior to the consideration of
the particular context. The composite is that whose function and end are
discernible and realisable in the context where it manifests and
potentially differentiable to the degree at which the context does or
may change.

1.5 To determine an impression is to have considered a specification. To
specify is to treat function and end as absolute figures in their own
accord. That thing whose function and end are indeterminable reveals a
given constraint of a consideration, though it being circumstantially
obscure does not suggest the operation of a robust constraint on the
very possibility of determining its mode. What can be thought, can be
determined with precision; what cannot be thought, can never be
considered. It is not the object of thought that resists determination;
it rather is the inadequate method of inquiry — the imprecise statement
— that shrouds it in obscurity.

1.6 What has change or the lack of change in itself — what changes or
remains regardless of thought — is what originates in the world. I name
that element a pragma (plural pragmata) and its class the
pragmatic. What does not have change or the lack of change in itself —
what changes or remains because of thought — is what originates in the
thinkable. I name that element a chrēma (plural chrēmata) and its class
the chrēmatic.

1.7 An object of thought can be created different or held constant
relative to its impression, so that it remains when considered as
remaining and changes when considered as changing, regardless of the
status of the very thing of the world it may correspond to.

2 Objects of thought are as considered.

2.1 A given presence is a fact. Facts are combinable. A combination with
a meaning that is not of a higher order than that of the facts as such,
or of their aggregation, is a state of affairs. A combination with a
meaning of a higher order than that of the facts, or of their
aggregation, is a case.

2.2 The case has a form and a constitution. The form of the case depicts
the relationship of the case's facts and it can be either true or false
in that regard. The constitution of the case is the facts in their
interplay, conveying a meaning which could not be formulated by the
constituent facts in isolation from one another.

2.3 To draw clear delineations between the facts and to distinguish
between their combination as state of affairs or as case is to achieve a
greater degree of clarity. In proceeding thus, concatenations and
arrangements of presences can be made, which form themselves into
structures and orders of such structures that operate as relative givens
— as established knowledge — in the determination of subsequent objects
of thought or in the reformulation of previously considered ones.

2.4 To know with certainty is to demarcate definitively between objects
of thought in a manner that clarity cannot ever produce an order of
structures that would contradict those already established. Where such
definitive demarcation is not attainable, there is no firm knowledge but
acquaintance, which is nonetheless contributing to the discernment of it
from them, yet which is subject to change by a possible shift to a
greater level of clarity. Where conflation is prevalent, where there can
be no distinct presences or combinations of facts, where the difference
between it and them cannot be identified, meaning cannot be
inferred. Indetermination prevents any further consideration. Clarity
is, in this respect, the prerequisite for the establishment of any
structure or order in the objects of thought.

2.5 To know that case's meaning, is to clearly identify those facts in
that interplay. Such particular knowledge would, however, not provide
the conduit to a knowledge of the meanings of all possible interactions
of facts, so that the direct knowledge of a meaning is not necessarily
the indirect knowledge of all possible meanings of cases yet to be
constituted.

2.6 Objects of thought can be made simple. To simplify is to treat facts
as completes, as irreducible units in that particular consideration,
without obscuring their transfiguration as facts — or as facts in a
given combination — and without predetermining their presence in another
consideration. Simpleness as decontextualisation or rearrangement of
complexity always is a product of a consideration, though it may not be
a property of the thing as such. “Decontextualisation” is not the
absence of context per se, for every object of thought exists in the
thinkable, not in nothing. To decontextualise is to treat an object of
thought in its own accord, as if no other object of thought could ever
affect it in any way.

2.7 To doubt the thing as such is to affirm it as an impression. There
can be no doubt, no affirmation, no consideration whatsoever about
anything that can not be thought; for doubts, affirmations and
considerations are all thoughts. It is not absurdity that lies outside
the confines of what can ever be thought — wherever such “confines” may
be drawn —, since absurdity still occurs as a thought. It rather is
impossible to ever think about the extra-thinkable.

2.8 Perfect knowledge must be definitive demarcation between all that
can ever be considered, though not of all there may be beyond the
thinkable. Hence, ultimate certainty rests on the recognition that it
can be so in regard to all that can be thought. Where — or for as long
as — ultimate certainty cannot be attained, one shall do with the
firmest of acquaintances, with the tacit acknowledgement that further
clarity may force alterations on the order thus engendered.

2.9 The world is antecedent to the thinkable, yet there is no world to
be thought without a thinker to consider it. The case — and its meaning
— can vary relative to its investigator by virtue of the constitution of
the case with the thinker being different than the constitution of the
case without the thinker. A consideration may start from a presumption
of certainty in the affirmation of a presence, in those occasions where
an already formed nexus of chrēmata conditions a thought that is made or
conveyed.

3 A consideration can be made otherwise.

3.1 A fact is considered in its actual state. That is its presence as
is.

3.2 A thing that can attain a mode other than its actual one reveals
potential states. The potential as such is not made manifest in the
world together with the actual.

3.3 The conception of a potential state partially reveals possible
specifications yet to be made, combinations of facts yet to be
actualised and structures yet to be arranged. As the case entails a
meaning of a higher order than that of its constituent facts, the
conception of possible combinations may still render inconspicuous some
meaning, continuing to require the actualisation of that potential state
for the sake of revealing those things in their fullest.

3.4 The actualisation of a potential state can furnish facts, cases and
structures that were concealed from any consideration prior to the
initial conception of that potential state or prior to its
actualisation; and may, furthermore, provide the impetus for identifying
more potential states. An actual state that was once absent from any
consideration appears qua impression as an additional object of thought.

3.5 Potential states are more than actual states to the extent that a
consideration can be made otherwise, though the fact thus considered is
not otherwise — another consideration can result in another fact. Should
all potential states be conceived and should no further potential states
ever be possible, no new consideration could be made.

3.6 The world and the thinkable may be finite, in which case all of
their possible combinations of facts would ultimately be graspable and
fully determinable, albeit not capable of simultaneous actualisation.

3.7 The comprehension of actual and potential states suggests that the
world and the thinkable are but the two magnitudes of an otherwise
singular reality. Reality is not only what is, but what can ever
be. “What” can ever be remains to be considered. Until that possible
terminus has been reached and has been determined qua terminus, final
doubt as to the ultimate expression of certainty shall persist.
