---
title: "Little Guide to the European Union"
subtitle: "On the specifics of the European polity"
excerpt: "The free/libre book 'Little Guide to the European Union' by Protesilaos Stavrou is an essay on the specifics of the European polity."
book: true
redirect_from:
  - /euguide/
  - /euguide/preface/
  - /euguide/introduction/
  - /euguide/eu-integration/
  - /euguide/rule-forming-making/
  - /euguide/integration-nation-state/
  - /euguide/eu-federalism/
  - /euguide/distribution-competences-eu/
  - /euguide/euro-egov/
  - /euguide/ecb/
  - /euguide/demos-sovereignty-mismatch/
  - /euguide/conclusion/
  - /euguide/changelog/
---

## Table of Contents

1.  [Introduction](#h:dcc92621-db7c-490a-b1f5-5602af601604)
2.  [Politics of the European integration process](#h:5b858d7d-1338-4d47-9059-f2f1ab6f0860)
3.  ["EU arrangements for forming and making rules"](#h:a740f7bb-24e1-4a9e-802a-24ae597c4d6a)
4.  [European integration and the role of the nation state](#h:1ca3ca7c-2371-43eb-91f5-25ec6fd3acb1)
5.  [The brand of EU federalism](#h:ddc547d1-cca4-4a57-86c7-ddb18e86bf86)
6.  [The distribution of competences in the EU](#h:e8d65f44-d083-452b-aaa2-70a84f4d2154)
7.  ["The euro and Europe's economic governance"](#h:4f5abea8-4f2a-4440-a934-eec0dc168c04)
8.  [Accountability and independence of the ECB](#h:b37c7b3f-0c71-4980-867b-7741fcdc3fc6)
9.  ["European demos and sovereignty mismatch"](#h:25be9976-ffbe-4e79-8d03-0df74804e2a5)
10. [Conclusion](#h:47004eef-2849-4c09-b71d-e3e104e5a286)

* * *

<a id="h:6484324d-77b3-41b9-9c25-2495698301e7"></a>

## Introduction

The *Little Guide to the European Union* is my second book on European
politics. It follows the publication of *A Handbook on the European
Union*, as well as a series of articles and seminars from mid-November
2015 to early April 2016.[^PrevWorkLinks] They can all be summarised as
attempts at gaining a better understanding of the specifics of the
European integration process and the legal-institutional arrangements it
has delivered.

There are, as I see it, two reasons for studying the EU:

- **General.** European citizens qua citizens have a duty to learn about
  a political organisation that affects their everyday life. An informed
  public is better prepared to hold the authorities accountable.
- **Particular.** European studies are my area of specialisation. In
  carrying out such independent research I improve my expertise and
  refine my views.

The present book is written with an *academic mindset*, follows a
*blogging style*, and partakes of a *hacking spirit*. The first consists
in the method of analysis of the themes covered herein. It is
descriptive to the extent possible, rather than prescriptive. The second
is made manifest in the overall approach to the book's writing. The
*Little Guide* is meant for a wide audience. Technical terms and
professorial palaver are either explained in their context or omitted
altogether. As for the third, it permeates the coding techniques used to
present the book on this website. It also informs the choice not to
charge any fees for its delivery.

The *Little Guide to the European Union* is not the definitive opus on
the subject. It rather is an entry-level publication for those who want
to learn more about the EU or deepen their understanding of it. The
chapters are ordered in such a sequence as to provide for a gradual
progression from the basic to the more advanced issues. The content
covered does not address every single aspect of the EU architecture,
though it does capture the main topics and most important items in
European politics.[^EUThemesImportanceNote]

My hope is that you will find this book useful and informative.

[^PrevWorkLinks]: [A Handbook on the European
    Union](https://protesilaos.com/euhandbook/). Published on November
    8, 2015. For the other EU-related projects, see my [blog
    posts](https://protesilaos.com/blog/) and [seminar
    series](https://protesilaos.com/seminars/).

[^EUThemesImportanceNote]: These are "important" in terms of their role
    in the EU architecture. Understandably, this can be a judgement
    call.


<a id="h:5b858d7d-1338-4d47-9059-f2f1ab6f0860"></a>

## Politics of the European integration process

European integration is the process by which nation states in Europe
proceed to harmonise their legal order through decisions adopted at the
supranational level.

That is a sentence conveying a lot of information. We will spend the
rest of this chapter analysing its parts:

- "is a process"
- "nation states in Europe"
- "harmonise their legal order"
- "decisions adopted at the supranational level"

### The process

The European Union (EU) has not been created outright. What is now in
place is the latest version of an ever-evolving set of
legal-institutional arrangements. The first European Communities were
founded in the 1950s. Their scope was limited to only a handful of
policies, while their membership included six countries, namely, France,
West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and
Luxembourg.[^HistoryIntegration]

The first instance of integration was the European Coal and Steel
Community (ECSC).[^TreatyECSC] This was a regional cartel, established
for the purpose of boosting trade between its member states in the two
major industries of the time. The ECSC also provided for a common
management of those industries, thus preventing any one government from
using them for its own ends, as they had done during the two World Wars.

The predecessor of the EU is an organisation established in the late
1950s: the European Economic Community (EEC).[^TreatyEEC] From its very
name we can infer a change in scope. The EEC was not supposed to focus
on specific items of trade and/or industries thereof. Its purpose was to
create a common market among its member states. To that end, the
Community-level politics were focused on dismantling barriers to trade
between the states, while establishing a common approach to customs and
tariffs towards third countries.

With the establishment of the European Economic Community, the
integration process shifts from a cartel to a regional trading block.

It took decades for the EEC to deliver on its objective. Its powers were
limited. Member states had veto rights. Each could jeopardise any
attempt at a common position. Eventually progress was achieved,
oftentimes courtesy of important rulings from the European Court of
Justice. National trade impediments were being abolished and the EEC
seemed to be gaining momentum.

It can be argued that the EEC was a success in terms of what it sought
out to achieve.[^SingleMarketMissing] The single market was instituted,
while the way was paved for proceeding to the next phase of economic and
political cooperation: monetary union.

The conception of Europe's Economic and Monetary Union coincided with
the transition to an ever more ambitious project: the European
Union. The EEC gave its place to the EU.[^EUMaastricht] Here too we
witness a change in name that signifies a broadening of the
organisation's scope, even if tacitly so. The EU is not just about
trade. It is an all-encompassing polity, a peculiar kind of
constitutional order. Its ultimate telos, if only an implicit one, is to
politically unify the European nations.

What is important to draw from this brief historical overview is the
triptych of (i) consensus politics at the European level, (ii) the
gradualism of the integration process, and (iii) the overall
incompleteness of the polity. In particular:

- **Consensus.** Integration proceeds in a stepwise fashion. No radical
  changes are made. Every instance of progress tends to be the
  end-product of broad agreements on several fronts, both among European
  institutions and national governments.
- **Gradualism.** Major steps forward come in the form of Treaty
  law. The European Treaties are the Union's primary legal corpus, its
  "constitution". When they are amended, the European polity sets on a
  course of reform. The European Treaties are flexible enough to allow
  sufficient space for policy-makers to promote a common EU agenda
  through legislation. Seen from the perspective of a national
  government, EU secondary law is as semi-permanent as a constitution,
  since it can only be repealed or otherwise amended following
  widespread consensus at the European level.
- **Incompleteness.** The EU, the latest iteration of the integration
  process, remains "in the making". There are several areas of policy
  that still need to be harmonised, such as taxation or the pertinent
  issues of migration and asylum.

### Nation states

The European Union is not a state in its own right. It derives its
authority from its constitutive nation states. As is stipulated in
Article 1 of the Treaty on European Union:[^TEULink]

> [the European nation states] establish among themselves a EUROPEAN
> UNION, hereinafter called "the Union", on which the Member States
> confer competences to attain objectives they have in common.

The EU is an extension of its Member States' collective will. National
governments hold the view that through cooperation at the European level
they can best promote their national interests and, perhaps
inadvertently, contribute to the overall good of the Union. They see
integration as a win-win situation.

The Union features several platforms for deliberations between the
Member States. In fact, intergovernmental politics are central to the
European project. There are two EU institutions in particular where
national governments form their collective position on the specifics of
European integration:

- the *European Council*, which consists of the heads of state or
  government of the Member States;
- the *Council of the European Union*, which comprises ministers from
  national governments and meets in various formations depending on the
  area of policy.

The role of the Member States is such that virtually no European policy
can be forwarded without their involvement.

### Rule harmonisation

Europe as a whole is a largely heterogeneous continent. There are many
nations, cultures, languages. In terms of political organisation, these
manifest as divergent constitutional traditions and historical path
dependencies. What applies to one country may not hold true for its
neighbours.

It is against this backdrop that European integration unfolds as a
systematic effort to bring about a convergence of legal-institutional
traditions and norms. For Europe to work, its laws need to have a
system-wide consistency. The peculiarities of its constitutive nations
are respected but must be balanced against the need to harmonise
legislation.

Heterogeneity of this sort can offer an explanation as to why European
politics are characterised by the aforementioned triptych:

- Consensus is needed because no one nation's constitutional identity
  can be considered superior to another's.
- Gradualism is necessary to allow sufficient time for convergence to be
  achieved, also at the level of formulating a common view on the best
  way forward.
- The incompleteness of the EU reflects the very fact that at this stage
  in the process the nation state understood as sovereign remains
  relevant and, hence, authority between it and the EU is to be
  distributed in accordance with a series of agreements.

### Decisions at the supranational level

The "supranational" or else the "European" is the level of
decision-making above the nation state. In the context of the EU, it is
often referred to as "Brussels". What we describe with this is a couple
of phenomena:

- the actions of the EU institutions, typically in the form of the
  *ordinary legislative procedure* (standard law-making process) or
  preparatory work towards that end;
- the congregation of national governments as European Council or
  Council of the EU and the policies adopted therefrom.

Five out of seven EU institutions have no *direct* connection to the
national level. They are purely supranational entities that represent
the interests of the Union at-large. Those namely are:

1. **European Commission**, with one Commissioner (the political
   leadership) per Member State;[^AboutEUCommission]
2. **European Parliament**, though its deputies—the Members of the
   European Parliament or MEPs—are elected in accordance with national
   lists, with whatever implications that may have on the representation
   of interests and their impact on policy (e.g. Germans can only vote
   for candidates running in Germany, French for those running in
   France, etc.);[^AboutEuroparl]
3. **European Central Bank**, though its Governing Council consists of
   the governors of the national central banks plus the Executive
   Council (the latter is Member-State-independent);[^AboutECB]
4. **Court of Justice of the EU**, with the General Court consisting of
   one judge per Member State;[^AboutCourtJustice]
5. **Court of Auditors**, with one member per EU
   country.[^AboutCourtAuditors]

The remaining two EU institutions—European Council and Council of the
EU—can be considered *formalised* intergovernmental formations. It is
where the interests of the national governments are fully represented.

There are cases where national governments meet in ad hoc or
quasi-formal arrangements, such as with the case of the Eurogroup which
is made up of the Finance Ministers of the Member States whose currency
is the euro. The Eurogroup is mentioned in a protocol to the European
Treaties, but is not a proper formation of either the European Council
or the Council of the EU. Its decisions are, strictly speaking, not
legally binding. However since the very same ministers meet together
with a few more of their colleagues at the Ecofin, the formal Council
gathering for economic issues, the Eurogroup's conclusions are
eventually incorporated in the official EU agenda.

### Future prospects of European integration

The key phrase that denotes the reform of the EU is "Treaty
change". With it the scope of the EU can be broadened. Given how recent
crises have revealed certain shortcomings in the existing EU
architecture, there are at least three areas of policy where future
integration may focus:

- **EU-level fiscal policy**, in the form of the capacity of the
  European level to raise taxes, issue debt instruments ("eurobonds"),
  and perhaps exercise some form of investment policy to balance out the
  effects of fiscal discipline enforced through Europe's system of
  economic governance;
- **migration and asylum**, which will consolidate whatever legislation
  will be introduced over the coming months, in particular as concerns
  border management and the distribution of asylum seekers, as well as
  allow the supranational level more power to enforce its decisions;
- **security and foreign policy**, perhaps in the form of a
  proto-European army or else a "defence capacity", a greatly empowered
  police and intelligence framework of cooperation between EU nations,
  and an outright European foreign policy that is not complementary to
  that of national governments.

As of now, this list is pure speculation based on ideas being floated
around by various credible sources or officials. Under the current
conditions, a Treaty reform does not seem likely, at least not before
2020.

If there is one thing to remember from all of the above, is that
European integration is a *process*. Views that were taken for granted a
few years back, such as fiscal policy being a near-sacrosanct national
prerogative, have been profoundly reconsidered under the weight of the
circumstances and the pressing need to adapt accordingly. Today it may
seem far-fetched to suggest, for instance, that economic governance
should be conducted by a European [economic] government. Over the medium
term that may become the new normal.

What remains constant throughout European integration, is the ongoing
development of the supranational level—now the EU—into a fully fledged
polity.

[^HistoryIntegration]: [The history of the European
    Union](http://europa.eu/about-eu/eu-history/index_en.htm). A
    valuable source of information by the official website of the EU.

[^TreatyECSC]: [Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel
    Community](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=URISERV:xy0022). Overview
    of the Treaty.

[^TreatyEEC]: [Treaty establishing the European Economic
    Community](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=URISERV:xy0023). Overview
    of the Treaty.

[^SingleMarketMissing]: Though there exists a single market, it still
    remains fragmented along national lines on the following:
    e-commerce, financial services, energy and transport, taxation, the
    recognition of vocational training.

[^EUMaastricht]: The European Union succeeded the European Economic
    Community in 1993. It was ushered in by the Treaty of Maastricht,
    which was signed in 1992. The euro, which is the centrepiece of the
    Economic and Monetary Union was introduced in 1999.

[^TEULink]: [Treaty on European
    Union](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A12012M%2FTXT). This
    together with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
    constitute the Union's primary law.

[^AboutEUCommission]: [About the European
    Commission](http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/european-commission/index_en.htm). Overview
    by the official EU website.

[^AboutEuroparl]: [About the European
    Parliament](http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/european-parliament/index_en.htm). Overview
    by the official EU website.

[^AboutECB]: [About the European Central
    Bank](http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/ecb/index_en.htm). Overview
    by the official EU website.

[^AboutCourtJustice]: [About the Court of
    Justice](http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/court-justice/index_en.htm). Overview
    by the official EU website.

[^AboutCourtAuditors]: [About the Court of
    Auditors](http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/court-auditors/index_en.htm). Overview
    by the official EU website.


<a id="h:a740f7bb-24e1-4a9e-802a-24ae597c4d6a"></a>

## EU arrangements for forming and making rules

In a typical republic, the state's functions are divided in at least
three: (i) executive, (ii) legislative, (iii) judiciary. This is also
known as the principle of the separation of powers, commonly referred to
as "checks and balances". The EU partakes of this principle in that its
institutions enjoy operational independence from each other and/or from
national governments. No authority can interfere with their *internal*
affairs so long as they work within their remit.

The European Commission is the executive, the European Parliament
jointly with the Council of the EU are the legislative, the Court of
Justice of the EU is the judiciary. Additional functions are performed
by the European Central Bank, which is the monetary authority, and the
Court of Auditors, which is the auditory authority.

Where complexity is introduced is in the case of the European
Council. This institution is where the heads of state or government of
the EU Member States meet to decide on the future of European
integration. The European Council adopts conclusions on all policies
concerning the EU. These typically are in the form of "guidelines"
towards the European Commission, asking it to implement a given plan,
initiate the legislative process, or conduct some relevant background
research.

Two recent pieces of diplomacy that are crucial to the European Union
are (a) the agreement between the EU and the UK concerning the latter's
renegotiated position in the former,[^EUUKCouncilDeal] and (b) the
EU-Turkey deal regarding migration and asylum.[^EUTRCouncilDeal] Both
were agreed upon at the European Council.

Given the importance of the decisions it adopts, one would be justified
to think that it acts as an effective "EU government". Indeed the
European Council is the single most important institution in terms of
determining the actuality and future prospects of the EU. It sets the
policy agenda. It however falls short of qualifying as a "government"
since it does not get to implement its will. That is the role of the
European Commission. The heads of state of government of the Member
States will agree on a common position. The Commission will elaborate on
the details and the specific requirements for its realisation.

### The bifurcation of the EU executive

To this end, perhaps it is best we qualify our understanding of the
European polity's executive. Rather than it being uniform, it consists
of two parts each with a distinct role:

1. **Deciding executive.** The European Council gets to decide on the
   direction of European integration and to shape the EU in accordance
   with the collective will of its constitutive nation states.
2. **Implementing executive.** The European Commission deals, among
   others, with the day-to-day workload of actualising the conclusions
   of the European Council. It also makes sure that the Member States
   comply with European law. It is the "guardian of the Treaties".

The EU's bifurcation of its executive branch consists in the
institutionalised distinction between its deciding and implementing
roles. We could argue that the Commission acts more like a public
service than a ministerial cabinet, even though it is headed by a group
of Commissioners that tend to be prolific politicians in their own
right. It still is an "executive" though, especially as concerns its
capacity to initiate—and then enforce—legislation.

The most common procedure for making European laws is the *ordinary
legislative procedure*.[^Codecision]

The Commission presents a draft to both the European Parliament and the
Council of the EU. The legislative institutions, here standing on an
equal footing, follow their internal procedures for formulating their
position towards the Commission's proposal.

Once both complete their work on the draft legislation, typically in the
form of introducing amendments to the text, they come together to
compare their results and agree on a final document.

The finished article is promulgated as a new law. It is imperative that
Parliament and Council reach an agreement. Without it the draft will not
become law of the Union.

### Outlining and substantiating rules

Couched in those terms, we can begin to better understand how the EU
Member States shape the European integration process and set out to
pursue objectives they have in common. Their collective will at the
European Council provides the impetus for new legislation or a series of
actions on a given front, while their involvement in the legislative
procedure ensures their input is incorporated, at least in part, in
secondary law.

Given this two-fold influence we may introduce another distinction
emanating from the bifurcation of the executive. Rules in the EU are not
produced outright. They are first agreed upon in outline—they are
"formed"—at the European Council. Then they are rendered concrete—they
are "made"—through a series of negotiations that unfold within the
context of the legislative procedure.

The Union's deciding executive is, in other words, the entity
responsible for *rule-formation*, for identifying the abstract features
of future steps in the integration process. Whereas the EU's
implementing executive is involved in *rule-making*, to ensure that
flesh is added to the bones of the European Council's "guidelines".

### The EU's factors of differentiation

In this chapter we introduced a couple of qualifications to our
understanding of (i) the separation of powers, in particular as concerns
the executive function, and (ii) the method of formulating rules for the
system at-large. The terms we employed describe phenomena that
differentiate the European Union from a 'typical' republic.

While the words themselves can be changed, the constant is the overall
*indirectness* germane to the institutional arrangements of the EU and
to how their interplay contributes to the integration process.

Complexity, the multitude of interlocking variables, is not unique to
the European Union. Many types of polity have their peculiarities. This
is not a matter of finding the "right" or "wrong" approach. Our task
here is to point out those characteristics in an effort to comprehend
how the EU works and who gets to do what.

Ultimately though, it contributes to our understanding of "Brussels" as
something other than a monolithic, homogeneous whole.

[^EUUKCouncilDeal]: [Timeline of the EU-UK
    deal](http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/uk/2016-uk-settlement-process-timeline/)
    by the official website of the European Council.

[^EUTRCouncilDeal]: [EU-Turkey
    deal](http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/03/18-eu-turkey-statement/),
    March 18, 2016.

[^Codecision]: The ordinary legislative procedure used to be known as
    the "co-decision procedure". The Treaty of Lisbon renamed it and
    made it the main process of law-making in the EU. On its website,
    the European Parliament offers an [overview of the legislative
    powers](http://www.europarl.europa.eu/aboutparliament/en/20150201PVL00004/Legislative-powers)
    it enjoys.


<a id="h:1ca3ca7c-2371-43eb-91f5-25ec6fd3acb1"></a>

## European integration and the role of the nation state

The European Union is, by its very design, a multilateral
organisation. Many parties are involved. Decisions are the end-product
of negotiations on multiple fronts. What is good for the Union as a
whole may not necessarily be in the best interest of any one national
government.

An overview of the European integration process reveals an inexorable,
albeit gradual, transfer of sovereignty from the national to the
supranational level. The first European Community was only concerned
with the industries of coal and steel. Then its scope was broadened to
cover everything peculiar to a common market. With the establishment of
the European Union in the early 1990s, it has further expanded into the
realms of monetary and fiscal policy, while it has the potential to
affect, in some way or another, almost every area of policy.

The European polity gets its power *from* the Member States, not *as an
addition* to theirs. The EU may, for example, act on behalf of its
Member States in negotiating a trade agreement. This very capacity has
been delegated to the supranational level and, thus, been removed from
the direct control of national governments.

If, for the sake of conceptual analysis, we adopt a macro view of
sovereign authority in Europe, we will think of it as more or less
constant and heteroclite (since it is distributed among a multitude of
nation states). What the European integration process does is to alter
the balance of power by, essentially, redistributing sovereignty,
typically in the form of concentrating an ever growing portion of it to
the supranational level.

The government of an EU Member State of the present is far more limited
in its options for unilateral action than a government in the
mid-twentieth century. On the face of it, the overall success of the
integration process is correlated with the relative enfeeblement of the
nation state.[^SuccessIntegrationNote] From the national perspective, a
new executive willing to introduce a set of reforms must be able to
operate within constraints that are exogenous to it. The rules of the EU
or the prevailing political conditions in Europe may hamper a national
impetus for reform, even if that were the desire of the corresponding
demos.

There are plenty of examples of such power relationships. In the summer
of 2015, when Greek citizens voted in a referendum against further
austerity measures their government could not deliver on their
mandate. National sovereignty is not absolute and, most importantly, it
is not morally superior to that of other nations. Given the
circumstances, the result of the Greek referendum could only lead to an
unrealisable course of action, as was ultimately the case. Similarly,
the debate on the forthcoming "Brexit" referendum focuses on the
presence of these EU-generated constraints on the national
government. Those for exiting the Union see the EU legal corpus as a net
negative, while those in favour of the continued membership of the UK in
the EU see it as a net positive.

### The bigger picture of integration

Even though the EU introduces certain limitations to unilateral action
at the national level, these cannot be judged solely from the micro
perspective of the nation state. One needs to account for the overall
effects on the macro scale. The reason national governments have
hitherto been willing to transfer part of their sovereignty to the
supranational level must be, based on their revealed preferences in the
form of EU Treaty law, that they think of it as a prerequisite to the
creation of a win-win situation.

The criteria may be different in each case, but the conclusion seems to
consistently be in favour of further integration or, at the very least,
of preserving what has been achieved thus far. Developed states may
greatly benefit from their access to the European single
market. Developing countries stand to gain from the support of EU funds
for their convergence with the developed economies of the Union. Nations
that prioritise the consolidation of their independence, defence and
concomitant foreign policy may see the EU as the de facto political
branch of NATO on the European continent: an additional layer of
security.

Given that the EU has exclusive competence over such items of economic
policy as trade agreements with third countries, we may entertain the
view that national governments see the EU as an amplifier of their
collective bargaining power in a globalised or globalising
economy. Europe negotiating as a block is thought of as preferable to
multiple nations engaging in uncoordinated negotiations with trading
partners from outside Europe.

Understandably, the normative value of European integration is relative
to the context. Value judgements can be made and are being made, though
so far the majority of national governments seems to be in favour of the
EU or at least of the status quo.

### The EU and the nation state

The constitutive nation states of the EU have agreed to transfer part of
their sovereignty to the European level. They have provided their assent
to their relative disempowerment, at least in the immediate sense. One
may even argue that they have agreed to render themselves largely
irrelevant. Rather than having the first and final say, the argument
would go, they perform the ancillary task of transposing European law
into national legislation.

Whatever the speculation on the future prospects of the nation state,
the European Union is not designed to usurp its Member States or compete
with them over legitimacy.[^EUNationsFaziArticle] The EU is the
*functional extension* of the collective will of European nations. It is
the nation states that formulate, sign, and ratify the European
Treaties; the primary law of the Union. The intergovernmentalism
inherent to the EU, manifesting in the multitude of input conduits in
decision-making available to Member States, is meant to promote and, in
a sense preserve, the vital interests of European nations.

It is true that in a multilateral setting any one part is but a fraction
of the whole, even if an important one. That a given government has a
narrower scope in its capacity for unilateral action is to be attributed
to the very nature of inter-state politics. Except perhaps in the
instance of total war, relations between states necessarily entail a
mutual diminution in their relative power over policy, in exchange for
the goods that may derive from their cooperation.

The inescapable trade-off of European integration is this:

1. maximisation of national sovereignty, which may be externalised as
   adversarial attitudes towards other states and diminishing potential
   returns from alliances;
2. sharing of sovereignty, which translates into more preferable
   conditions for concerted international action and the emergence of
   "economies of scale" on a cross-border basis.

The constitutive nations of the European Union *qua Member States* have
thus far opted for the latter path, without however forfeiting the
claims on their sovereignty. They continue to play a vital role in both
forming and making European rules. They remain the only source of EU
funds as the EU cannot raise its own resources. And, above all, are the
units that will ultimately formulate, sign, and ratify any future
amendment to the Union's primary legal corpus. The specifics of such a
reform are solely contingent on their collective will.

[^SuccessIntegrationNote]: The notion of "success" is here used in a
    quantitative sense, not a normative one. The scope of European
    integration keeps broadening, while the EU is becoming ever more
    capable in enforcing European law. If the original telos is an "ever
    closer Union", then the European polity is well on track to meet
    it. Whether this is "good", "desirable", or whatnot and whether its
    modal features should be of a particular kind or another, is a
    separate discussion.

[^EUNationsFaziArticle]: Also worth reading on this subject is my essay
    titled: [European integration, leftism, and the nation
    state](https://protesilaos.com/eu-integration-leftism-nation-state/). I
    comment on Thomas Fazi's constructive criticism of certain idealist
    tendencies of the European left. Published in my EU politics blog on
    April 9, 2016.


<a id="h:ddc547d1-cca4-4a57-86c7-ddb18e86bf86"></a>

## The brand of EU federalism

In academic circles or as part of esoteric commentary on what the
European Union "actually is", the EU is often referred to as a polity
*sui generis*. It is in a class of its own. The argument is that the EU
does not conform with other models of state or political organisation,
in particular those of a federation or confederation. The modal features
of the supranational decision-making arrangements peculiar to the EU
present us with something new; a polity that has yet to be properly
defined.

This discussion is not entirely without merit. Indeed the European Union
exhibits all sorts of peculiarities and deviations from the norm. But
that is true for every instantiation of a model in every field of
scientific inquiry. The model is meant to be an abstraction from the
specifics. It captures what is common in a multitude of phenomena and,
hence, must remain generic. An "abstraction" of the whole that only
applies to a fraction of cases, exalts the particular to the general,
and propounds a range of assumptions about reality, is not the most
valid choice in an epistemological sense.

The claim that the EU is not a "genuine" federation or confederation can
only hold if the definition of these entities is precise, descriptive,
and enumerative. That tends not to be the case. Furthermore, these forms
of polity are by their very design tailored to the specific
cultural-historical needs of their peoples. The United States of America
is a federation. So is Russia, Belgium, Switzerland, etc. Each has its
particularities and may thus qualify as a "false" or "pseudo"
federation, as an exception to the norm, if we are to follow the line of
reasoning that emphasises the factors of differentiation rather than
trace the patterns.

The veil of obscurity surrounding European politics is in large part the
product of miscommunication, not of the EU being intrinsically
incomprehensible. Indeed, the European Union is complex. So is virtually
every federation and, perhaps, every modern unitary state that
decentralises authority. Rather than single out the items that
distinguish the European polity from other multi-level political
organisations, let us elaborate on the specifics of its underlying
*federalism*.

### The EU as a federal system

The term "federalism" is polysemous, at least in a European context. It
may denote an ideology and be treated as largely positive or
progressive. Examples are political groups, especially at the European
Parliament, that promote "more Europe", a "United States of Europe", or
variants thereof at every given opportunity. Federalism may be used as a
derogatory term, especially by those who consider themselves
eurosceptics or opponents of the EU. For them a federalist is an
apologist or cheerleader of everything that is wrong with the "Brussels"
apparatus.

These labels are loaded with the significations and ideological
predispositions of the group using them. A more objective term, the one
we employ herein, is the ideology by which a polity is to be instituted
as a multi-layered, decentralised whole, featuring both a vertical and
horizontal separation of powers.[^VerticalHorizontalPowerSeparation]

The architects of the European Union—the governments of the nation
states that sign and ratify the European Treaties—are guided by such
[tacit] federalism while adapting it to their evolving needs.

They do not envision the EU as a "United States of Europe", hence the
ubiquity of intergovernmentalism and the robust restrictions to the
power of the supranational level on cardinal expressions of statehood
such as taxation, police and secret services, the military and the
defence of national territory.

They believe European politics should be separate from national
politics, though influenced by them, thus the presence of supranational
institutions that labour for the general good of the Union while
receiving input from the national level, be it from governments or
citizens.

And they most certainly abide by the principle of the separation of
powers, underpinning the operational independence of all EU institutions
and enabling each of them to function independently from the influence
of either their peers or national governments.

The European Union is a federal system. Unique in some of its secondary
features, just as virtually every federation. Its legal-institutional
order, the arrangements for rule forming and making, remain conceptually
above the construct of the nation state though *never* in opposition to
its normative achievements.

The EU draws its legitimacy from its constitutive nations. It is not a
*separate* constitutional order. It functionally extends the collective
will of its Member States, also by fleshing out the legal-moral standard
by which they all abide to and strive to
perfect.[^TreatyEUArticles1And2]

In this regard, the EU is not a distinct state or a detached
bureaucracy. The European and national levels are, on a macro scale, an
organic whole.

### Politics at the European level

All politics within the context of the European Union take place at a
level above the nation state. Yet not all of them follow the exact same
procedures. The modalities of the various EU processes and methods for
making decisions do vary.

And here is the tricky part that perhaps contributes to the
exaggerations about the EU being sui generis. Intergovernmental affairs
are between the Member States. But their end product is not national
politics or variants thereof. These are international relations
engendering international policies. Since they unfold within the
framework of EU law, are permeated and defined by it, their outcomes are
*European* or else *supranational*.[^IntergovernmentalismOutsideAcquis]

In the EU there are two categories of political process:

1. the national, which concerns the internal affairs of the state and
   conforms with the constitutional traditions of the nation in
   question;
2. the European, which covers all areas of policy that have a
   cross-border dimension and where more than one national government
   are involved or where EU institutions provide their input in some
   meaningful way.

The first category is straightforward. The second is subdivided into two
types: (a) intergovernmental, (b) supranational. These vary in terms of
their directness as seen from the national level:

- intergovernmental are those EU politics where national governments are
  directly involved, such as within the context of the European Council
  or the Council of the EU;
- supranational are the affairs of EU institutions with no direct
  connection to national politics, such as the operations of the
  European Parliament, or the European Central Bank.

When we, therefore, comment on the intergovernmentalism of the EU we are
implying a certain disposition towards its specifics. We may, for
instance, condemn intergovernmental politics on the grounds that they
always result in a compromise between competing national agendas,
without the interests of the EU at-large being considered.

Whatever the case, intergovernmental affairs are but another facet of
European politics, a peculiarity of the immanent federalism of the
European integration process.

### Federal system ≠ federal republic

Lastly, by treating the EU as a "federal system" we are distinguishing
between two parameters of political organisation closely related to our
present inquiry:

1. **Federalism.** The form of the polity, in this case the multi-level
   structure.
2. **Republicanism.** The content or quality of everything pertaining to
   the political process and interpersonal experiences thereof.

That the EU exhibits a brand of federalism does not necessarily mean
that it also delivers on all the public goods peculiar to a modern
republic. The structure and the quality of a polity are not
connatural. They are separable, even though they certainly influence
each other.

More practically, there are federations that operate in accordance with
republican norms. There are other federations that leave much to be
desired in terms of democratic standards. The EU aspires to be a
republic, to institute or otherwise enhance democracy on a supranational
scale, but typically falls short of its much-vaunted ambitions.

In a nutshell, the EU is not a "federal republic".

[^VerticalHorizontalPowerSeparation]: By "horizontal separation" we
    refer to the division of powers between the various branches of the
    polity (executive, legislative, judiciary, etc.). By "vertical
    separation" we denote the distribution of authority between the
    various levels of government (supranational, national, regional,
    etc.).

[^TreatyEUArticles1And2]: This claim is in line with Articles 1 and 2 of
    the [Treaty on European Union
    (TEU)](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A12012M%2FTXT). The
    former recognises the nation states and European peoples as the
    constitutional subject of the Union. The latter documents the
    practical morality they have in common.

    Article 1 TEU:

    > By this Treaty, the HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES establish among themselves a EUROPEAN UNION, hereinafter called "the Union", on which the Member States confer competences to attain objectives they have in common.
    >
    > This Treaty marks a new stage in the process of creating an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe, in which decisions are taken as openly as possible and as closely as possible to the citizen.
    >
    > The Union shall be founded on the present Treaty and on the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (hereinafter referred to as "the Treaties"). Those two Treaties shall have the same legal value. The Union shall replace and succeed the European Community.

    Article 2 TEU:

    > The Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities. These values are common to the Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.

[^IntergovernmentalismOutsideAcquis]: The exception to this would be
    those cases where intergovernmental politics take place *outside*
    the framework of EU law. For example the European Stability
    Mechanism is not envisaged in the European Treaties, though it is
    consistent with them and will eventually be brought into the
    European legal corpus. The same goes for the Treaty on Stability,
    Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union. The
    governments congregating as European Council may have to adopt a
    certain decision that is legally binding on them but *technically*
    is not based on the EU Treaties. These kind of legal gymnastics are
    worth studying for the sake of understanding the inventiveness of
    European leaders and their capacity to find solutions even when the
    EU Treaties seem to offer no good option. At any rate, no
    international covenant of such a sort can contradict the European
    constitutional order. What they do is complement it on the margin.


<a id="h:e8d65f44-d083-452b-aaa2-70a84f4d2154"></a>

## The distribution of competences in the EU

The European Union is the functional extension of the collective will of
its constitutive nation states. Whatever powers it has are given to it
by common accord incorporated in treaty law. The EU is created by its
Member States for the sake of strengthening and promoting their
collective interests as well as for pursuing objectives they have in
common.

The European Treaties, the Union's primary law, inter alia specify the
distribution of competences in the Union.[^TheTreatiesoftheEUNote] They
provide for the *vertical* separation of powers between the national and
European levels. This is about what area of policy belongs to which
government. Whether it is a local, national, or European issue. In doing
so, they formalise a key aspect of a federal system: clear delineations
between the scope of authority of the various administrative strata.

There are three criteria that guide the distribution of competences in
the EU. These namely are:

1. the principle of conferral;
2. the connatural principles of subsidiarity and proportionality;
3. the inferred principle of delegated sovereignty (shared
   responsibility).[^InferenceDelegatedSovereignty]

### The three-fold distribution of authority

The principle of conferral is the single most important item in this
context. In essence, it is an exhaustive list covering areas of policy
where the EU has a role to play. The underlying rationale is that powers
explicitly given to the EU—in the way and extent to which they are—are
no longer specific to national governments and, conversely, any area of
policy that is not mentioned in the Treaties remains a national
prerogative.

The division of competences has three permutations based on the degree
of power conferred to the European level:

1. those that are *exclusive* to the Union;
2. those that are matters of *shared* competence between the EU and the
   Member States;
3. those where the EU can only be *supportive* of the actions of
   national governments.

**Exclusive competence** confers supreme authority to the
EU.[^ExclusiveEUCompetences] European institutions have the first and
final say over the specifics of policy. National governments must abide
by supranational decisions. An example would be the European Central
Bank (ECB), which gets to conduct monetary policy against the backdrop
of the Union's exclusivity over monetary affairs in the euro area. The
eurozone's National Central Banks cannot deviate from the supranational
agenda to exercise a monetary policy that is good for the economy under
their jurisdiction. They can only implement the decisions of the ECB,
even to the detriment of the domestic economy.

Another example would be trade agreements with the rest of the world. It
is the European Commission, the Union's implementing executive, which
gets to negotiate them. The controversial proposed deal between the EU
and the USA, formally known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership (TTIP), is a case in point. Should it enter into force, it
would have a profound effect on the European economy and the standards
upheld therein, much to the dismay of civil society. Popular protests
notwithstanding, and courtesy of the EU's exclusive competence, it is
only up to the Commission to make the judgment call on whether to
proceed with finalising TTIP or not.

In general terms, exclusive competence means that the European interest,
defined in terms of what EU institutions consider the best course of
action under the circumstances, takes precedence over any national
interest in the area of policy concerned.

**Shared competence** confers a degree of sovereignty to the EU
institutions while entailing a high level of responsibility from the
Member State towards its peers.[^SharedEUCompetences] This is sometimes
referred to as "shared sovereignty" which is not the most useful of
descriptions. Sovereignty is not really shared. The legal framework is
outright supranational, i.e. outside the scope of national unilateral
action, and the European level gets to have the first and final say over
the implementation of decisions. What is mutualised is the
accountability of the national government, which is no longer limited to
its citizens but extends to the other national governments.

Put simply, in areas of shared competence no national government can act
on its own accord, nor can its initiatives prejudice or otherwise
undermine the position of the rest of the Union. The reason some speak
of "shared sovereignty" is that the accountability part gets to be
negotiated between national governments, typically at the European
Council or the Council of the EU. They neglect the fact that in such
negotiations Member States are already bound by European laws and,
hence, have already outsourced much of their decision-making power. The
sovereignty to be shared, if thought of as absolute, was not there to
begin with.

**Supportive competence** for the EU leaves authority to the national
level.[^SupportiveEUCompetences] However, the very fact that it is being
mentioned under the principle of conferral implies that the Union can
still issue its recommendations and, potentially, exert a degree of
diplomatic pressure when and where necessary.

This could be the case especially on issues where the lines can be
blurred. For example, industry is supportive competence, yet it could be
considered in conjunction with some other item, say, energy, which would
introduce an element of shared competence. Speculation aside, national
governments have the first and final say. This provision is likely meant
to be a fallback option for the EU in case where it would absolutely
need a residual legal basis to promote some European policy.

### Criteria for balancing competences

The principle of conferral is not enough to draw clear delineations
between the various levels of government. The enumerated areas of policy
are generic and subject to diverging interpretations. With multiple
actors involved, in the form of EU institutions and national
governments, there needs to be a canonical method for guiding
policy-makers. To this end, the Treaties envisage two principles:
*subsidiarity* and *proportionality*.

Subsidiarity stipulates that power should be exercised as close to the
citizen as possible. Its scope should always be commensurate with the
task at hand. If a matter can be properly addressed locally, then only
the local authorities should be involved. Phenomena that have a national
reach must fall under the control of the national government. Policies
with a cross-border dimension require action at the supranational level.

This bottom-up approach cannot automatically define the degree to which
the authorities can exercise their power. Hence the principle of
proportionality to ensure that actions pursued are always limited to the
sought ends, while never creating conditions for the expansion of
control. For instance, even if a European institution were supposed to
tackle a given issue, its policies should not grant it additional
powers, nor should they have that objective. Furthermore, they should
not prejudice the capacity of other political entities to pursue their
mandate.

Subsidiarity and proportionality can be perceived as distinct
categories. Their functions are different. These however are not
ultimate functions but only instrumental for a greater end, a common
objective: to set the normative parameters for the application of the
principle of conferral.

Subsidiarity and proportionality substantiate a bottom-up method for
distributing competences in accordance with the vertical separation of
powers, and for limiting the scope of the authorities' discretion to the
sought ends within their remit.

### Delegated sovereignty (shared responsibility)

A nation state can gain accession to the European Union only after it
complies with the European legal order, the acquired level of
integration known as the *Community acquis*, *acquis communautaire*, or
just *acquis*. The state in question needs to harmonise its legal order
with that of the Union, typically by transposing into national law the
EU's legislation.

Rule harmonisation is not a mere exercise of matching distinct sets of
legal documents. It rather is kind of a constitutional reform, for it
ramifies to key areas of statehood and implies a diminution in the
sovereign authority of the nation state.

By virtue of the aforementioned principles, EU Member States commit to
divide their sovereignty and to transfer a portion of it to the
supranational level, either in the form of an exclusive EU competence or
as a matter of shared competence with the rest of the Union. Whatever
the specifics, they agree to bind their fate with that of the EU: to
considerably limit their scope for unilateral action, acknowledge the
shared responsibility intrinsic to membership and the conditions it
entails, in exchange for the benefits of European integration.

The transfer of sovereignty is a negotiated result agreed upon in
functional terms. Powers are given to the EU so that it may be in a
position to pursue objectives common to its Member States. There is no
normative aspect to it. The European level does not make claims on
sovereignty. Legitimacy is firmly rooted in its constitutive nations and
in their common will, manifesting as the European integration process
and constitutional order thereof.

European Member States do not *forfeit* their right to sovereignty. They
only provide assent to its redistribution within the framework of EU
law. A nation that would consider its position in the Union to have
become detrimental to its interests could engage in a predefined process
of reclaiming its sovereignty, with the ultimate effect of exiting the
Union.[^Article50TEUNote] As the acquis currently stands this trade-off
cannot be circumvented. Full national sovereignty and EU membership are
mutually exclusive.

The repatriation of sovereign authority is no mechanistic procedure nor
is it dependent solely on the will of the nation concerned. Joining the
EU means delegating competences to the supranational level. Doing so
creates a certain bond between the nation state and the Union; a bond
that cannot be severed unilaterally. For that to happen, the rest of the
Union, mostly the other Member States, must offer its consent. EU-exit
and its modal features will have to be thoroughly negotiated at the
level of the European Council.

Thus while EU Member States do not forgo the claims on their
sovereignty, they do, nonetheless, outsource or mutualise at the
supranational stratum the decision over its possible repatriation. This
is, in and of itself, a clear indication of the shared responsibility
attached to EU Membership.

### De facto European sovereignty

The EU is seldom referred to as "sovereign". The historical evolution of
this term carries significations that are intimately linked with the
construct of the nation state. Only nations qua states are meant to be
sovereign. The EU is not a nation, nor is it a state in its own right,
at least not properly so called.

While there may be good reasons for maintaining that approach, we cannot
afford to obfuscate the fact that the European Union *does* exercise
sovereign authority over a range of policies. Whether this qualifies as
"sovereignty" in a technical sense within the framework of international
law is of secondary consideration. What matters is the more immediate
effect: in areas of policy where the EU has exclusive or shared
competence, no national government can pursue a unilateral course of
action. In other words, a Member State cannot appeal to its sovereign
right as a nation state in an effort to deviate from the agenda
forwarded at the European level.

Perhaps the only legitimate reason for not considering the EU as
sovereign is that its authority is conferred to it by nation states that
reserve the ultimate right to reclaim control over any area of
policy. Should the Member States choose to proceed with a Treaty reform
that would roll back much of the integration process, the EU's
sovereignty would necessarily be diminished.

The problem with this line of reasoning is that it goes both ways. It
also holds true for nation states. In their case a legal or
constitutional reform could equally impact their sovereign authority,
such as when they first complied with the European acquis for the
purposes of joining the Union. Yet we tend not to think of the possible
reformulation of a nation's legal order as sufficient reason for
withholding judgement on the effective features therein.

Rather than predicate our concerns on the potentiality of things, let us
consider their actuality: as things currently stand, the EU enjoys
sovereignty over a number of policies. Furthermore, its constitutive
nation states have forged a supranational bond between them that they
cannot cut without the approval of the rest of the Union. The EU's
authority cannot be undone by any one national government and must
therefore be considered robust in that regard. European sovereignty—in
the way and extent to which it is—will remain present for as long as the
European Treaties and concomitant secondary law foster the necessary
conditions for its existence and enforcement.

[^TheTreatiesoftheEUNote]: When we allude to "the Treaties", "European
    Treaties", or "EU Treaties", we are referring to the two
    international covenants that underpin the European legal order,
    namely: (1) Treaty on European Union or TEU, (2) Treaty on the
    Functioning of the European Union or TFEU. Both have the same legal
    status as primary law of the Union.

[^InferenceDelegatedSovereignty]: It is "inferred" as such since the
    Treaties do not offer a proper name for it. "Delegated sovereignty"
    or "shared responsibility" are descriptive terms I have coined.

[^ExclusiveEUCompetences]:
    Exclusive competence covers (Article 3.1 TFEU):

    > (a) customs union; (b) the establishing of the competition rules necessary for the functioning of the internal market; (c) monetary policy for the Member States whose currency is the euro; (d) the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy; (e) common commercial policy.

[^SharedEUCompetences]:
    Shared competence concerns (Article 4.2 TFEU):

    >  (a) internal market; (b) social policy, for the aspects defined in this Treaty; (c) economic, social and territorial cohesion; (d) agriculture and fisheries, excluding the conservation of marine biological resources; (e) environment; (f) consumer protection; (g) transport; (h) trans-European networks; (i) energy; (j) area of freedom, security and justice; (k) common safety concerns in public health matters, for the aspects defined in this Treaty.

[^SupportiveEUCompetences]:
    Supportive competence includes (Article 6 TFEU):

    > The Union shall have competence to carry out actions to support, coordinate or supplement the actions of the Member States. The areas of such action shall, at European level, be: (a) protection and improvement of human health; (b) industry; (c) culture; (d) tourism; (e) education, vocational training, youth and sport; (f) civil protection; (g) administrative cooperation.

[^Article50TEUNote]: The meaning of delegated sovereignty—though not the
    exact term—and the provisions for its reversal are enshrined in
    Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union.


<a id="h:4f5abea8-4f2a-4440-a934-eec0dc168c04"></a>

## The euro and Europe's economic governance

The euro is the European Union's official currency. All Member States
will eventually have to adopt it, save a couple of
exceptions.[^EuroOptOuts] The euro area, also referred to in the media
as the "eurozone", currently comprises 19 of the 28 EU nation
states.[^EuroStatusData] Europe's single currency was introduced in
1999, as envisaged by the Treaty of Maastricht which was signed a few
years earlier. That Treaty established the European Union as the
successor organisation to the European Economic
Community.[^HistoricalInfoMaastrichtTreaty]

What this concatenation of key events has in common is an underlying
paradigm shift in European politics. The scope of the integration
process was no longer to be limited to the abolition of trade barriers
and other impediments to cross-border economic activity. European
leaders wanted to turn their Community into something more than a common
market or regional trading block. They saw Europe as a rising power
boosted by the collapse of the Soviet Union. To that end, they set out
to deepen the ties between their nations in an effort to pursue
political unification. The European Union with its single currency
signals the formal beginning of that change in focus.[^NoteEMUScope]

### Monetary means to political ends

The euro, just like all fiat money, is a political project. An
instrument for increasing the economic interconnectedness of its member
countries and a catalyst for their coalescence into a unified monetary,
fiscal, financial, and ultimately political whole.

By joining the euro, nation states opt to transfer their sovereignty
over monetary policy to the European level. In so doing they deprive
themselves of a major instrument for macroeconomic control or, put
differently, of a powerful means of indirectly protecting the domestic
economy from foreign competition. Without the ability to engage in such
practices as adjusting the money supply or fiddling with exchange rates,
nations can only rely on structural factors (e.g. labour and investment
policy) and careful budgetary planning to enhance their outlook and
competitiveness.

Member States further agree to delegate substantial powers over fiscal
policy and economic coordination to the supranational level. Europe's
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), of which the euro is the ultimate
stage of integration, entails much more than uniformity of monetary
policy. It is an elaborate system of rules and institutional
arrangements for regulating and aligning the fiscal and economic policy
of all national governments, with additional restrictions for those
whose currency already is the euro.

What countries lose in terms of flexibility and the capacity for
unilateral action on the economic front, they gain in the form of stable
prices, increased trade with their European partners as well as the
political advantages of being part of the "European core".

The assumption is that at least over the longer term, the presence of
the euro as well as the shared responsibility enforced by the EMU
contribute to the stability and robustness of the European
architecture. No Member State is allowed to engage in unfair competition
with its peers. In principle, there is no "beggar thy neighbour"
practices within the EMU. Besides, the euro is an international reserve
currency. Adopting it is an appealing proposition for nations that want
or need to increase their [collective] bargaining power on matters of
global trade. While the specifics may vary, the euro provides incentives
for countries to continue to cooperate and to pursue further
integration.

Understandably the case for the euro may appear implausible under the
circumstances, especially given the EU's recent economic woes. For many
the perception of it is that of a failed venture; a flawed currency area
that is, according to some vociferous critics, teetering on the verge of
its collapse.

Opinions on the actuality and future prospects of the euro
notwithstanding, the policy choices of European decision-makers reveal
the kind of resolve and commitment that will not allow the euro to
fail. The Economic and Monetary Union has gone through some profound
reforms in recent years, largely as a reaction to the "euro crisis".

In terms of its legal-institutional arrangements, the EMU appears as
much more of a complete puzzle today than it was less than a decade
ago. What is in place is markedly different from what was envisaged in
the 1990s, especially in terms of the powers transferred to the European
level for the purposes of fiscal discipline, governance, and economic
coordination.

### The incompleteness of the original EMU

The Economic and Monetary Union is an advanced stage in the integration
process that expands upon the achievements on the single market. The
single market is a rather decentralised system. Member States agree to
mutually abolish trade restrictions between them and adopt common
standards. They do so by means of implementing supranational
legislation. The single market is little more than a free trade
area. There is no EU-level authority for regulating economic policy as
such. That is left to the discretion of national governments.

Whereas the EMU ramifies to constitutional issues and matters of
sovereignty. Power is delegated to the European level either in the form
of an exclusive competence, as in the case of monetary policy in the
euro area, or in a shared competence between the EU and the Member
States.

Whatever the case, the result is the same from the perspective of a
national government: unilateral action on economic policy is no longer
an option. All key issues become part of the policy-making process of
the EU and of the multi-faceted negotiations that characterise it.

All EU Member States are part of the EMU, yet only the euro countries
are bound by a subset of legal provisions on fiscal policy. The
difference here is one of degree. The euro area requires closer checks
on national budgets due to the uniformity it imposes on the monetary
front.

The rationale for prohibiting unilateral action is rooted in
economics. A monetary union unites economies in such a way that negative
spill-over effects can easily disrupt the entire system. Frivolous
spending by one government can result in losses for the rest of the
area. If anything, the recent financial crisis revealed the extent to
which euro countries are interdependent.

Back in the 1990s the architects of the EU and the euro did not foresee
the implications of monetary uniformity across diverse national
economies. They did not anticipate a multitude of concurrent crises
unfolding on fiscal, banking, and macroeconomic fronts. The original EMU
lacked both the tools and the laws for coping with such a set of
challenges as those generated by the euro crisis.

On fiscal issues, the original EMU was over-confident in the viability
of a generic rules-based governance model. Monetary policy was trusted
in the hands of the European Central Bank while each national government
was to pursue its own fiscal path provided it followed a handful of
rules as per the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). Most relevant among
them are the two rules of 3% budget deficit and 60% public debt.

The approach was mechanistic and excessively optimistic in its
underlying assumptions. A Member State was thought to be contributing to
the optimal functionality of the EMU if it was operating within the
SGP's constraints. There was next to nothing concerning macroeconomics
in general, such as the trade balance, capital flows, and the like. The
effects of monetary integration on a cross-border, systemic basis were
not considered to their full extent. As for the very rules enshrined in
the SGP, the European level lacked credible mechanisms for enforcing
them, hence their de facto obsolescence in the build up to the euro
crisis.

On the financial front, the original EMU remained divided along national
lines. The rules that would create a level-playing field were either
inadequate or insufficient. Bank supervision remained a national
prerogative, while banking risk was not monitored in the context of
monetary union but as yet another domestic affair. The cost of a failed
bank would be incurred by the respective national government.

The rationale was that every EU Member State had to put its own house in
order. Under the SGP it had the obligation to do so, while it was
granted the freedom of deciding on the specifics thereof. Implicit to
this order was the assumption that nation states indeed preserved the
necessary sovereign authority to fully control their economy. With EMU
membership limiting the scope for independent macroeconomic planning,
this was proven to be a largely false and misguided belief.

Overall, the original Economic and Monetary Union was a rather
incomplete edifice. It could go on working during the good times, but it
would most certainly disintegrate under the duress of the financial
crisis. In terms of governance, such incompleteness meant that economic
coordination was predicated on inter-state politics. The single most
evident weakness therein is that the implementation of the rules becomes
a matter of contest and of negotiating the results. One national agenda
contradicts the others without the systemic economic good—the interest
of the EMU at-large—ever being considered.

The EMU was reformed courtesy of the Great Recession. The new financial
environment forced European decision-makers to reconsider their
assumptions. Many of the tenets that underpinned the pre-crisis EMU were
either proven fallacious or irrelevant. More specifically:

1. **The inadequacy of the no-bailout clause.** The European Treaties
   have a provision that prohibits either the Union or the Member States
   to incur the debts of another government.[^NoBailoutTreatyArticle]
   The thinking is that losses should never be mutualised at the
   European level. Every nation state should be held responsible for its
   own fiscal position (hence the SGP). While that may be good in
   theory, it seldom works in practice. As a matter of fact, the
   *spirit* of the EU's no-bailout clause has been effectively rendered
   void. Member States did take losses whose origin was external to
   their domestic economy. They did so in the form of contributing funds
   to the bail-out programmes that were provided to the crisis-struck
   countries (Greece still is one), while they also reserved resources
   for the European Stability Mechanism, the de facto fiscal backstop of
   the EMU.
2. **The ineffectiveness of a generic SGP.** While the budget deficit
   and the public debt are important metrics, they cannot shape the
   prospects of an economy. Not every economic factor is a function of
   both or either of these two. In the case of the EMU, the problem is
   compounded by the fact that Member States have dismantled direct
   trade restrictions between them while they have given up their
   monetary sovereignty. Phenomena with a cross-border reach cannot be
   tackled by any one government operating on its own accord, and are
   certainly not contingent on a couple of fiscal indices.
3. **The futility of national oversight over banks with cross-border
   activities.** Financial institutions are among the greatest
   beneficiaries of the single market. For them the EMU means that they
   can engage in operations abroad without having to worry that the
   government of the country in which they operate suddenly decides to
   radically change the economic environment, say, by imposing trade
   restrictions. Reforms to the EMU can only come from the supranational
   level. In practice, this means that capital gets to move almost
   totally unencumbered within the system. But the same was not true for
   bank oversight. There was a need for institutions that could perform
   that role at the European level. Originally these did not exist. Each
   national government had to supervise financial institutions on its
   own. Systemic risk on a EMU-wide scale would thus go unchecked.

### The reformed EMU

What triggered the reform of the EMU was the euro crisis. It exposed the
design flaws of the system. Policy-makers had to address them or risk
annulling decades of integration. The euro would not be allowed to fail
at the first series of obstacles.

The policy response to the crisis focused on two areas: (i) bank
regulation, (ii) state finances and economic coordination. Existing
rules were tighten up while new legislation and a couple of treaties
were introduced that turned economic governance into a matter of *shared
competence* between the Union and the Member States.

#### Bank regulations

Regarding banks a set of laws were passed that aimed at improving their
robustness to economic shocks. This body of legislation is also known as
the Single Rulebook. It regulates capital requirements, deposit
guarantees, and bank resolution.[^CRDVI] Its objective is to create a
certain uniformity in bank regulation, which is a prerequisite for
effective prudential policy.

By "prudential policy" we refer to the supervision of the financial
sector. It consists of two functions, both of which ultimately rest with
the European Central Bank:

- **Macroprudential.** The macro perspective examines aggregates across
  the financial system in order to assess the presence and degree of
  systemic risk. It also evaluates the compliance of the sector with the
  Single Rulebook. This policy is exercised under the Single Supervisory
  Mechanism (SSM).
- **Microprudential.** The micro level is for singling out a troubled
  bank for special measures. Provided certain conditions, the
  authorities may intervene in its internal management for the sake of
  its recovery, force its orderly restructuring or even lead to its
  breakup. The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) is in place to perform
  this function.

The SRM has another component to it: a common fund to cover the costs
related to bank resolution. The idea is that the nascent banking union
consists of three pillars: (a) macroprudential policy to enforce the
uniformity of financial oversight, (b) microprudential policy to tackle
any irregularities in the system, and (c) a common deposit insurance
scheme meant to bring all of the system's banks under a common
denominator of trustworthiness. As of now, the third pillar remains a
work in progress. The relevant legislation is still in the drafting
phase and is expected to be put forward over the near-to-medium term.

All the legal-institutional arrangements for financial supervision were
introduced amid the euro crisis. In 2011, the European Supervisory
Authorities were established, whose ultimate task is to formulate the
prudential rules. These bodies are: (i) the European Banking
Authority,[^EBA] (ii) the European Securities and Markets
Authority,[^ESMA] and (iii) the European Insurance and Occupational
Pensions Authority.[^EIOPA] The European Systemic Risk Board at the
European Central Bank, was also established at around the same
time.[^ESRB]

Prior to the crisis, the EMU had no effective prudential policy. Whether
these will be enough remains to be determined.

#### State finances and economic coordination

In 2011 amendments were made to the Stability and Growth Pact to ensure
more effective surveillance over state budgets and
deficits.[^SGPTimeline] A new Treaty with a similar scope though outside
the European acquis was also ratified by almost all Member States. The
Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and
Monetary Union, most commonly referred to as the "Fiscal
Compact". Enshrined in it are several provisions for budgetary
discipline, such as the concept of the structural deficit or the notion
of the medium-term budgetary objective.

The Fiscal Compact was an ad hoc response to the EMU's design
flaws. Given that this is an international treaty, it effectively enjoys
a constitutional status. That strengthens the European level by
eliminating the scope of national governments for unilateral budgetary
planning. The Fiscal Compact may be outside the EU acquis, but it
remains aligned with it. The plan is that it will eventually be
incorporated in the acquis some time over the medium term. The reasons
for it being a new treaty, rather than just another piece of EU
legislation, can be traced to legal and time constraints. In principle,
the Fiscal Compact partakes of the same underlying approach to economic
policy as the rest of European law.[^FiscalCompactInventiveness]

On this area of policy there also exists an extensive corpus of
secondary law. Europe's new framework of economic governance is based on
two sets of legislation known as the Two-Pack and the Six-Pack. The
former consists of two legal instruments. The latter of six. What these
laws essentially do is extend and further specify the rationale of the
Stability and Growth Pact. They also broaden the extent of policy
coordination well beyond the confines of budgetary policy. Economic
governance covers everything from the drafting and monitoring of state
budgets, to which macroeconomic indicators will be examined in the
evaluation of the relative competitiveness of Member States.

The process of the EMU's governance takes place within the context of
the so-called "European Semester". This is a procedure that starts with
the calendar year and covers its first half. The Commission assesses the
economic outlook of each state and proceeds to issue recommendations on
any issue that may need to be addressed. These recommendations will need
to be considered by the government in question prior to the drafting of
its next budget. Draft budgets must be sent back to the Commission for
review.

The European Semester is not a bureaucratic exercise in just issuing
opinions and recommendations and in publishing macroeconomic reports,
though it may well appear that way. It has a profound effect on
policy. Unlike the original design of the EMU, the Commission enjoys
extensive powers over the enforcement of the rules. It can proceed to
impose restrictions or even sanctions in cases where it identifies any
excessive macroeconomic imbalances, or deviations from the targets on
the budget deficit.

### Governance not government

What remains of the Economic and Monetary Union's original design is the
lack of a central authority for exercising economic policy. Everything
has been harmonised except decision-making. The EMU continues to be a
rules-based system that binds together nation states that are otherwise
*thought of* as independent. There is no overarching sovereign, no
European state that underpins the euro (in the same way other currencies
are backed by a sovereign state).

While economic governance is a shared competence between the Union and
the Member States, there is next to nothing in terms of specialised EU
institutions for economic policy outside the scope of intergovernmental
decision-making. For example, the EU does not have a European Finance
Ministry that could be tasked with formulating a coherent, system-wide
economic policy. The EU does not have its own fiscal capacity
manifesting as a European Treasury. It can neither raise taxes nor issue
debt instruments. There only are national fiscal policies that need to
be coordinated between them, not with respect to a European fiscal
policy.

To this end, shared competence on economic governance means that the EMU
proceeds based on what is the best negotiated result between national
governments, not what is necessarily needed for the good of the system
at-large. This kind of mismatch between the legal corpus and the
political process can engender asymmetries on two levels:

- there is no defined, and hence transparent, procedure for tackling in
  a timely fashion macroeconomic imbalances that are cross-border in
  nature;
- the European Central Bank has trouble fulfilling its mandate on
  targeting inflation, since it cannot enjoy the support of a
  counter-party fiscal authority that could help prop up aggregate
  demand.

The gist of the matter is that the EMU remains a work in progress. It is
not that long ago that the euro crisis provided the impetus for its
thoroughgoing reform. The changes made to its design can all be
summarised as a concerted effort at state building at the supranational
level; a corrective to the EMU's original statelessness.

The latest roadmap for the completion of the EMU was published a little
less than a year ago. It is the "Five Presidents Report", which
describes in outline all of the new initiatives or pieces of legislation
that will be put forward over the short-to-medium term.[^FivePresidents]
We can expect something more specific towards the end of this year or
more likely during 2017.

Whatever the case, the euro is here to stay. Without it Europe's
Economic and Monetary Union would be of no use. The European Union would
then have a hard time evolving into anything more than a regional
trading block. Too much political capital is invested in the ultimate
success of the single currency. The very scope of European integration
hinges on it. It would be extremely unlikely for policy-makers to
abandon a project that was initiated in the early 1990s and which
[tacitly] aims at the political unification of European nations.

Couched in these terms, it might as well be argued that those who are
foreseeing the impeding demise of the euro are placing a bet against
Europe's collective ambition to remain relevant in the ever globalising
world of the 21st century.

[^EuroOptOuts]: There are a couple of exceptions to the rule of adopting
    the euro. Read the official summary for the [United
    Kingdom's](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=URISERV%3Al25060)
    and
    [Denmark's](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=URISERV%3Al25061)
    exemption from the third stage of Economic and Monetary
    Union. Sweden is another country that does not look likely to join
    the euro area. Technically, it has not been granted a formal
    opt-out. It just "fails" to meet the requirements.

[^EuroStatusData]: See [euro area
    membership](http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/euro/adoption/euro_area/index_en.htm)
    data provided by the European Commission.

[^HistoricalInfoMaastrichtTreaty]: Official [overview of the Treaty of
    Maastricht](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:xy0026). The
    European Union and the euro were envisaged therein.

[^NoteEMUScope]: In technical terms, the euro represents the third stage
    of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). It is meant to complete the
    development of the single market into a cohesive economy. All EU
    Member States are part of the EMU. Not all of them have reached the
    third stage, though they will eventually have to (opt-outs
    notwithstanding).

[^NoBailoutTreatyArticle]: The no-bailout clause is enshrined in Article
    125 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Strictly
    speaking, it does include language that can be interpreted in
    justification of the various bail-out schemes.

[^CRDVI]: [Capital requirements regulation and
    directive](http://ec.europa.eu/finance/bank/regcapital/legislation-in-force/index_en.htm). For
    a useful summary, see the European Commission's
    [memo](http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-13-690_en.htm).

[^ESRB]: [Regulation (EU) No
    1092/2010](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32010R1092
    ). This piece of legislation concerns macroprudential oversight of
    the financial system and establishes the European Systemic Risk
    Board.

[^EBA]: [Regulation (EU) No
    1093/2010](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32010R1093)
    establishing the European Banking Authority.

[^EIOPA]: [Regulation (EU) No
    1094/2010](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32010R1094)
    establishing the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
    Authority.

[^ESMA]: [Regulation (EU) No
    1095/2010](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32010R1095)
    establishing the European Securities and Markets Authority.

[^SGPTimeline]: The European Commission has a [useful
    timeline](http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/economic_governance/sgp/index_en.htm)
    of the changes made to the Stability and Growth Pact and relevant
    legislation.

[^FiscalCompactInventiveness]: What is interesting about the modalities
    of the Fiscal Compact is that it reveals exactly how creative
    European decision-makers can be when they find that the EU framework
    hampers their plans. Given the scope of the treaty, it also shows
    that the euro area has specific needs, which will most likely be
    further defined and institutionalised in future amendments to the
    EU's primary law.

[^FivePresidents]: [The Five Presidents'
    Report](https://ec.europa.eu/priorities/publications/five-presidents-report-completing-europes-economic-and-monetary-union_en). Published
    by the Commission on June 22, 2015.


<a id="h:b37c7b3f-0c71-4980-867b-7741fcdc3fc6"></a>

## Accountability and independence of the ECB

The powers of the EU are horizontally divided in accordance with the
principle of the separation of powers. Each European institution, every
EU entity tasked with a cardinal function, enjoys operational
independence. Neither the other institutions nor national governments
can interfere with their internal affairs.

The European Central Bank, also known as the ECB, partakes of this
principle. Its independence is commensurate with its role as the
ultimate authority over monetary policy in Europe's Economic and
Monetary Union, the euro area in particular.[^TreatyProvision] Being
independent allows it to conduct its operations with a
medium-to-long-term horizon. Electoral cycles do not affect it, nor can
a new EU policy agenda force it to adjust its monetary stance.

European leaders have designed this institutional arrangement under the
impression that a central bank can only be effective when emancipated
from the short-term temptations of the political process. Price
stability presupposes consistency and that requires long term planning
and execution. Monetary policy trickles down to the economy in an
incremental fashion. The transmission mechanism is not
immediate. Macroeconomic changes reflecting the impact of the central
bank's actions take time to materialise.  To this end, the monetary
authority cannot be bound by the will of politicians, whose role forces
them to focus on the short term. A money supply that would be tailored
to the needs of politics, would risk becoming erratic and, hence,
ineffective at achieving price stability.

This is, in outline, the rationale underpinning the institutional
standing of the ECB. Opinions on the particularities of economic policy
notwithstanding, the notion of insulating an authority from the ups and
downs of politics is not specific to central banks. It applies equally
to other functions of the polity where holistic thinking is needed. The
military is a case in point. The same is true for the courts, albeit for
slightly different reasons.

### Legitimacy and accountability

The point is that the underlying principle is sound. What matters is the
modal features of its instantiation and how these impact the
institution's legitimacy and accountability. These democratic qualities
go hand-in-hand: a state entity cannot be legitimate while remaining
unaccountable and vice versa.

Legitimacy in the normative fundament of an official entity's
authority. Powers granted to an institution must be sufficient and
proportional to the task, limited in scope, aligned with the will of the
demos, and consistent with its stated ends.

Let us take a closer look at this claim:

- **Sufficiency.** The institution must be in a position to deliver on
  its mandate, otherwise it cannot be judged as ineffective in the task
  of pursuing its policy objectives;
- **Proportionality.** The authority it wields needs to be commensurate
  with the task at hand. Never in excess. A disproportionate use of
  power implies abuse, and that may entail an authoritative practice.
- **Limited in scope.** The mandate of a specialised institution can
  only be evaluated if it is specific. The broader it is the more
  divergent the interpretations can be, and hence the greater the
  difficulty to determine whether the institution is operating within
  its remit.
- **Will of the demos.** Given that the legal status is protected by the
  constitution, and since that is based on democratic legitimation, the
  institution must not deviate or in any way contradict the practical
  morality of the polity. Doing so could create tensions, raising
  questions about the appropriateness of various policies.
- **Consistency of ends.** A mandate is given to a specialised
  institution so that it may deliver on it. For as long as it meets its
  objectives it is evaluated as adequate for the task.

Legitimacy is further divided in two classes: (i) input and (ii)
output. The former concerns the mandate given to the official
entity. Legitimacy of this sort exists only when the demos offers its
input within the framework of the legal order. As for output legitimacy
it is about the outcomes of the institution's measures and whether they
comply with its mandate.

The European Central Bank has no direct input legitimacy. It is a
technocratic entity whose members are appointed in office by national
governments. At best that makes it indirectly legitimate in terms of
input.

The ECB draws legitimacy from its output. It has a precise objective
that is enshrined in the European Treaties: to ensure price
stability. It has been endowed with sufficient powers to pursue that
end, and, it enjoys operational independence which further guarantees
its capacity to act.

The very mandate of the ECB is legitimate. It partakes of the legality
of the EU Treaties. As such, the criterion for measuring its success or
indeed its compliance with its role rests in price stability. For as
long as the ECB delivers on that front, it qualifies as legitimate in
terms of output.

### The obscurity of "price stability" over the "medium term"

The justification for output legitimacy is plausible and clear. It may
even be the optimal legal arrangement for specialised
institutions. Where complexity and indeed obscurity is introduced is on
the precise meaning of certain key terms, or rather on which entity gets
to attach a signification to them. More concretely, the Treaties do
envisage "price stability" as the ultimate telos of monetary policy. In
doing so they provide the legal cornerstone of the ECB. What they fail
to clarify is the exact meaning of that concept. They do not provide for
either a methodology or indeed a rate (or range) of fluctuation in the
aggregate price level.

Anyone who has ever followed the news on the European Central Bank has
come across the much-vaunted objective of price stability, which
manifests as a policy of targeting an annual inflation rate that is, in
the words of the ECB, *"below, but close"* to 2%. This definition, the
quantification of the Treaty provision, is provided by the ECB's
Governing Council.[^ECBInflationTarget] Put differently, the institution
to be held accountable defines the criteria for its accountability.

The European Treaties have completely omitted the horizon over which a
stability of prices is to be measured. This too is defined by the ECB
and encapsulated in the otherwise vague notion of the "medium term". It
is never talked about in terms of years. We cannot know for sure whether
the ECB has delivered on its mandate since we may not tell where the
evaluation is supposed to start and end on the time axis. Given that the
inflation rate is somewhat clear (close to 2%, but how close?), one
would expect some more specificity on the temporal magnitude of the
method.

What we infer from the above is that a flaw of the Treaties contributes
to a rather awkward institutional arrangement where the ECB is in the
advantageous position of both defining the criteria for its
accountability and making the judgement call on whether they are
met. Output legitimacy can be a sound justification for institutional
independence provided there exists a precise legal basis that ensures
the aforementioned aspects of legitimacy, namely, sufficiency,
proportionality, limited scope, democratic consent, consistency of
outcomes. In the absence of a clear method for measuring the deliverable
results, it is impossible to determine in any objective way whether a
technocratic institution is fit for its task.

### Open-ended inflation targeting

To illustrate the point, the ECB cannot be questioned for having failed
to maintain an inflation target of below, but close to 2%. The euro area
has been consistently far below the ECB's target. From July 2012, when
Mr. Mario Draghi (the ECB chief) stated his famous "whatever it takes"
claim for saving the euro, up until March 2016 the average inflation
rate is 0.8%.[^InflationData] That is near **1%**, i.e. far below
target.

Perhaps though we have just used the wrong time frame. Maybe it is too
short to qualify as "medium term". But how are we to settle this issue
in some objective way? Our best guess would be to infer a temporal
horizon from the ECB's own policy initiatives.

In its March 10, 2016 meeting the ECB's Governing Council approved of a
new set of monetary measures for injecting liquidity in the financial
system. The programme goes by the technical designation of Targeted
Longer-Term Refinancing Operations II (TLTRO II). What is of interest to
our inquiry is the maturity of these loans to the financial sector (the
time until they expire). That is four years long, while the entire
programme is conducted in the interest of price stability according to
the ECB's words:[^TLTROII]

> TLTRO II will contribute to a return of inflation rates to levels
> below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.

This is our most reliable indicator under the circumstances. The ECB is
tacitly admitting that it will meet its target at around the
year 2020. If we stick to July 2012 as a starting point—and there is no
reason why we can't start earlier—that would be about eight years. So,
may we conclude that the ECB's medium term is at least an 8-year-long
period? The answer is negative. All we are doing here is making an
educated guess, or rather, we are probing into the flaws of the European
Treaties as concern the accountability structure of the European Central
Bank.

### Output legitimacy based on benchmarks

For output legitimacy to function as intended, the mandate of the ECB
will need to be evaluated against a set of objective criteria. Based on
the above-mentioned loopholes or omissions in the Treaties these could
encompass the following:

1. the Union's primary law would have to render specific the meaning of
   "price stability";
2. the time frame for targeting inflation should be explicitly defined
   in months or years;
3. whatever quantification of the Treaty provisions should be ancillary
   and supportive of the main task enshrined in primary law, without
   anyhow endowing the ECB with additional discretionary power.

In the absence of at least those three items, the independence of the
European Central Bank does not really contribute to its
legitimacy. Furthermore, the basis for its accountability is rather
feeble and ineffective. This is one of the cases where the European
Treaties exhibit a major flaw. One of the main EU institutions falls
short of satisfying the normative democratic criteria of legitimacy and
accountability.

### A deeper fiscal-monetary disconnect

No central bank is omnipotent. Monetary policy cannot be a panacea for
weaknesses on the fiscal front nor a substitute for sound budgetary
planning. Europe's Economic and Monetary Union is already based on the
harmonisation of monetary affairs but remains far from homogenised on
fiscal issues. The EU, in particular the euro area, has a single
monetary function headed by the institution of the ECB, yet it lacks a
counter-party treasury. There is no EU-level entity responsible for
economic coordination, for raising and directing resources in an orderly
fashion, and for drawing linkages between finance and the real economy
on a system-wide scale.

Against this backdrop, the ECB can indeed face insurmountable obstacles
in its task to ensure price stability. It may then be true that we have
misplaced expectations for the monetary authority. We may be labouring
under the erroneous assumption that the inflation rate is solely a
function of monetary decisions. That the central bank can fine-tune it
at will. The truth is that the demand curve is equally important. For
instance, disinflation or deflation can also be reversed by activity on
the fiscal side such as in the form of investment spending that would,
ceteris paribus, put an upward pressure on prices.

The EU is in the process of completing its Economic and Monetary
Union. The fiscal and financial aspects of it are still incomplete. In
particular, there is no EU-level economic policy that could contribute
to the ECB's efforts for an average rate of 2% inflation. The European
Central Bank continues to be the only supranational entity that can
directly influence the average price level.

Whatever the case, economic policy is at its optimal when it is
holistic, where there is concerted action between the various branches
of the polity that deal with those issues. The European Central Bank may
not be delivering on its mandate because it is trapped in an inefficient
or incomplete institutional framework. Even so, that policy constraint
would not detract from the normative fact that the effective
arrangements for its legitimacy and accountability are far from
adequate.

[^TreatyProvision]: [Treaty on the Functioning of the European
    Union](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A12012E%2FTXT). The
    institutional independence of the European Central Bank (and the
    national central banks) is stipulated in Article 130 TFEU.

[^ECBInflationTarget]: [The quantification of price
    stability](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/strategy/pricestab/html/index.en.html)
    according to the ECB.

[^InflationData]: [Inflation
    data](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/prices/hicp/html/inflation.en.html)
    provided by the ECB's official website.

[^TLTROII]: [ECB policy
    announcement](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2016/html/pr160310_1.en.html)
    of March 10, 2016.


<a id="h:25be9976-ffbe-4e79-8d03-0df74804e2a5"></a>

## European demos and sovereignty mismatch

In a nation state those who are citizens of the state are by default
members of the national demos. The demos at-large bestows legitimacy
upon the authorities. In exchange, the state in its various functions
exists to promote the general good, or the national interest, which
among others includes national safety, social peace and cohesion, and,
in democratic systems, a set of fundamental rights and values that
provide and safeguard personal and collective freedoms.

The nation state is the only entity within a predefined territory that
enjoys the right to exercise legitimate force, or else sovereignty. It
is the application of this principle that provides a binding effect to
its statutes and policies. The law is an expression of sovereign
authority. It is the ultimate instrument for regulating intersubjective
relations within the territorial confines of the state. The tool for
formulating the specifics of the national compact and for determining
such cardinal issues of social organisation as the distribution of
resources, or the scope of individual freedom in relation to the needs
of the community. The power of the state to perform these vital
functions renders manifest the first aspect of national sovereignty:
*state sovereignty*.

In a democracy the demos lays the foundations of legality by agreeing on
a primary corpus of law, a constitution, or by recognising the law
developed through its historical-cultural tradition as the legal
fundament for the democratic institution of society. It is the primary
law that ultimately determines whether the statutes, decisions, or
actions of the state are legitimate and in line with the letter and
spirit of the national compact. The legitimation function of the demos,
the fact that it sets the specifics of the constitution, reflects the
second aspect of national sovereignty: *popular sovereignty*.

The people provide the state with the power to govern. Yet the people
qua demos only exist by virtue of the relevant legislation that
regulates citizenship. There is no body of citizens in a legal sense if
its members are not citizens of the state. And therein lies the virtuous
feedback loop between state and popular sovereignty. In a democracy both
need to be present. There can be no legitimate democratic polity without
the demos and there can be no properly defined citizenry without state
fiat.[^DemocraticSovereigntyNote]

We may think of modern democracy as a constituted polity, a compact
between the state and the demos, a virtuous feedback loop of state and
popular sovereignty; founded on a predefined corpus of primary law;
predicated on the separation of the state’s functions and the
decentralisation of its authority; where the executive rules for, by,
and with the people; where the judiciary is the ultimate arbiter of the
legality of the legal order; where statutory acts are formulated by
representatives of the demos in accordance with the rule of the
majority, without infringing the inalienable rights of the minority and
the irreducible capacity of every person to perform their role as
citizen in sharing the public good; and where the political order is
framed and bound by the law of the international community at-large,
with the universal values it recognises.

### The missing link for a European demos

The non-legal characteristic of the demos is its self-consciousness as a
community of citizens. One of the reasons the nation state has been an
enduring political construct through the centuries and remains at the
heart of international relations, is that the national demos functions
as an organic whole. The people do feel a sense of belongingness to
their fellow citizens. They share the same or similar traditions,
collective memories and narratives, are likely to speak a common
language, have the opportunity to participate in the same public
activities, abide by a uniform legal code, and, above all, are willing
to live in that nexus of norms, rules and institutions as citizens.

This disposition is the sense of national identity, or else *banal
nationalism*.[^BanalNationalismNote] People tend to be proud of being
part of their nation. It is the glue that keeps the demos
together. Statutes may confirm the national identity and regulate it
further, but they cannot foster it on their own. Interpersonal
confirmation among the people is needed. And it is this very sentiment
of national belonging that underpins the interchangeability of the
concepts "national" and "citizen".

In a European context, every national of an EU Member State is by
extension a European citizen.[^EuropeanCitizenshipLegal] A strict legal
interpretation of this fact would lead to the conclusion that there
exists a fully fledged, over-encompassing European demos. Such inference
would be erroneous. What is missing is the non-legal element: the
necessary social attitude for togetherness. The basic solidarity that is
more or less a constant within nation states.

In terms of the EU constitutional order, European citizens think of
themselves as primarily nationals of their respective state, with the EU
dimension being an addition to whatever benefits their nationality
grants them. We claim thus based on the revealed preferences found in
the very design of the EU, in particular:

- **Nations as the EU constitutional subject.** Nation states are the
  basic building blocks of the European Union. Their governments
  formulate, sign, and ratify the primary law of the Union, its
  "constitution". The EU does not have sovereignty of its own but only
  whatever set of competences is explicitly conferred to it by its
  constitutive nations.
- **Intergovernmentalism in day-to-day politics.** EU Member States
  collectively are the most important actor in European
  politics. Through the institutions of the European Council and the
  Council of the EU they engage both in forming and making European
  rules. Additionally, all EU funds come from national contributions,
  meaning that the European level cannot implement an outright European
  fiscal policy, say, for the sake of tackling unemployment.

Intergovernmental affairs are the outward expression of multiple banal
nationalisms. If citizens did not prioritise their respective national
interest, they would put pressure for establishing an outright European
government. This tendency would be expressed in the medium-to-long-term
ambition of national governments. Inter-state politics would be set
along the path of becoming superfluous.

Ambitious or perhaps unrealistic expectations aside, for as long as the
national interest takes precedence over the European interest, there can
be no fully realised European demos. To that end, intergovernmentalism
will remain a defining feature of EU federalism.

### Mismatch between popular and state sovereignty

Against this backdrop, we cannot consider the EU to have the virtuous
cycle of legitimation germane to national democracy, at least not in a
direct form.

*State sovereignty* exhibits a high degree of uniformity in those areas
of policy where the EU has competence. Decisions are adopted at the
European level and are implemented throughout the Union.

Whereas *popular sovereignty* remains compartmentalised along national
lines. National interests are being represented in a multitude of
ways. There is no equivalent European interest. What ends up being the
European good is a negotiated result—a grand compromise—between
competing national agendas.

This mismatch contributes to the overall *indirectness* of European
democracy, which can be further qualified as (i) indirect input
legitimacy and (ii) indirect accountability.

As concerns input legitimacy, European citizens do not have the right to
directly elect the European "government". The EU's implementing
executive, the European Commission, has its political leadership
appointed in office. The Commission is supposed to be an apolitical,
technocratic entity: the "guardian of the Treaties". Regarding the
Union's deciding executive, the European Council, it is composed of the
heads of state or government of the Member States. They are elected on
national platforms. The political leader of Germany is decided by the
Germans, that of France by the French, and so on. The Europeans *as a
whole* do not get to choose their "head of state or government" in
EU-wide elections.[^EPDirectInputLegitimacy]

The effects of such arrangements are particularly evident on the
accountability front. The EU has no supranational procedure whatsoever
for holding accountable the European Council *as such*. If the citizens
of a Member State do not like their government they can vote it out of
office. If they do not approve of the European Council, they can do
nothing as a unified whole. The only way would be for each national
demos to elect a new government following national
procedures. Notwithstanding the logistics and impracticality of such a
venture, it would not be founded in EU law. It would rather be covering
a glaring omission therein.

The constitutional order of the European Union is designed in such a way
that what applies in a national democratic context does not hold true
for the European level, at least not in its fullness. A European demos
does not exist as a self-conscious whole. What is present courtesy of EU
law is, at the very best, a demos manqué.

As for sovereignty and the democratic order it founds, the EU exhibits
an overall indirectness and incompleteness, which may imply
suboptimality, in both the modalities of its legitimation and the
procedures for its accountability.

This is the Union's sovereignty mismatch, which we may define as the
absence or malfunction of the virtuous feedback loop of democratic
legitimation between popular and state sovereignty.

Whether it is a design flaw of the European architecture or an immanent
characteristic of politics on a continental scale is subject for another
discussion.

[^DemocraticSovereigntyNote]: We could name this "democratic
    sovereignty". Perhaps though that is a superfluous qualification
    since a sovereign state in the modern international legal order has
    to be democratic or, more generally, to partake of certain universal
    values.

[^BanalNationalismNote]: "Banal nationalism" is just the widespread
    sentiment of belongingness to a nation. It should not be confused
    with *nationalism*, an ideology that prioritises—even exalts to the
    extreme—the national construct over every other facet of the polity
    and usually is intimately linked with ultra-conservative,
    authoritarian politics.

[^EPDirectInputLegitimacy]: The only EU institution that enjoys direct
    input legitimacy is the European Parliament. That still is not
    enough to change the bigger picture where the Parliament is but one
    of the many parts—and not the most important one.

[^EuropeanCitizenshipLegal]: [Official information
    page](http://ec.europa.eu/justice/citizen/) about EU citizenship.


<a id="h:47004eef-2849-4c09-b71d-e3e104e5a286"></a>

## Conclusion

As its title suggests, the *Little Guide to the European Union* aims to
introduce a wide audience to the main features of European politics.

 Its focus is on those items in EU affairs that enjoy a high degree of
constancy. That are more or less permanent. Current issues, as these
unfold in the news, have been intentionally omitted to help streamline
the book's message. The underlying assumption is that an understanding
of the general makes it easier to comprehend the particular, while the
opposite may not be true. Knowing, for instance, the specifics of the
March 2016 EU-Turkey deal does not offer any insight as so why the
European Council concluded the negotiations or why the European
Commission is working on implementing its provisions.

This book does not exhaust the topic it seeks to analyse. It is not
intended to be the one-and-only book a citizen has to read, nor is it a
beginner's manual to European politics. All it provides is a *guide* for
the politically minded to pursue further studies on their own. It is an
intermediate point between research cycles.

The *Little Guide* is delivered to the public free of charge. That
probably is the most pronounced form of idealism it partakes
of. Everyone with access to the Internet should have the chance to read
it, learn from it, and expand upon it. Knowledge of this sort need not
be confined to inner circles or hidden behind paywalls. What I gain in
return is, at the very best, a slightly improved chance at the labour
market.

### Special Thanks

Though this is not an exhaustive list, and with the risk of
unintentionally forgetting to mention someone, I wish to express my
gratitude to:

- All those behind the official EU websites for providing most, if not
 all, of the primary information used to produce this book.
- Dr. Alexander Apostolides
 ([@alexapostolides](https://twitter.com/alexapostolides) on Twitter)
 for his enthusiasm and support over the years.
- Hans Mund for his laudable efforts to raise awareness of the European
 Union and improve its transparency by connecting all the relevant
 sources of information, both private and public, via his
 [spreadthenews.eu](https://spreadthenews.eu/) platform.
- Gerald-Christian Heintges and Dr. François Mennerat for setting up
 [EurAssoc](http://www.eurassoc.eu/), as well as for their overall
 devotion to the empowerment of an EU civil society and the realisation
 of a European res publica.
- [Jakub Jermář](http://www.jermar.eu/) for his insightful views on
 federalism and the establishment of a European Federal Republic as
 distinct from the Treaties-based model of the EU.
- [Thomas Fazi](https://thomasfazi.net/) for his extensive commentary on
 the European Union and the euro, as well as his constructive criticism
 of certain idealist tendencies of the European Left.
- The people at [OneEurope](http://one-europe.info/), especially those I
 know best, Ivan Botoucharov and Cherian Grundman, for their
 contributions towards the emergence of a European public sphere and
 for their positive attitude in fostering an open debate about Europe.
- All those who have actively shared my publications in their social
 network, with Twitter users Lluís Camprubi
 ([@lluiscamprubi](https://twitter.com/lluiscamprubi)), Tom Crowley
 ([@Planoltom](https://twitter.com/planoltom)), Anda Burve-Rozīte
 ([@RoziteBurve](https://twitter.com/roziteburve)), and GrkStav
 ([@GrkStav](https://twitter.com/grkstav)) being among the ones I am
 aware of.

None of those mentioned can in anyway be held accountable for what is
written in the *Little Guide to the European Union*. I just refer to
them as a sign of good will. Responsibility rests entirely with me.


