---
title: "Structured Text on Sovereignty, Nationhood, Statehood"
subtitle: "On the core tenets of modern politics, examining in abstract the problématiques of 'who governs' and 'where is the locus of power'"
excerpt: "The free/libre book 'Structured Text on Sovereignty, Nationhood, Statehood' by Protesilaos Stavrou is an essay on political philosophy."
book: true
redirect_from:
  - /stsns/
  - /stsns/introduction/
  - /stsns/sovereignty/
  - /stsns/nation/
  - /stsns/state/
  - /stsns/nation-state/
---

## About the content and presentation of this book

1 The *Structured Text on Sovereignty, Nationhood, Statehood* (STSNS) is
a work on political philosophy.

1.1 STSNS explores topics pertaining to the two central *metapolitical*
problématiques of "who governs" and "where is the locus of power".

1.2 We define metapolitics as the field of research that examines the
general themes common to all instances of politics. It is the study of
the *abstract structure* of political phenomena. Patterns and constants
that can be discerned in day-to-day events, yet remain withdrawn from
immediate experience because of their higher degree of abstraction.

1.2.1 The prefix "meta" is applied in the same sense as in the
Aristotelian corpus of work. "Meta", literally meaning "after" (from
Greek μετά), is the body of research that follows from the practical
understanding of the subject at hand. In Aristotle's work,
*meta-*physics (after the physics) is the inquiry into the abstract
structure of physics; an inquiry that follows from the study into the
particulars of physics.

1.2.2 As such, the prefix "meta" does not acquire its typical
contemporary meaning of self-reference. "Meta" is the field of research
that connects concrete findings to generalisable rules and higher order
insights. To do metapolitics, we must be versed in politics.

1.2.2.1 And this, by the by, is how we ought to approach philosophical
considerations. Start by mastering the specifics. Else risk constant
confusion and frustration.

1.3 The present book is not a thorough exploration of the metapolitical
space. It has a limited scope. To study at some depth the major
magnitudes of sovereignty, nationhood, statehood. What is political
agency? Does the state express the will of the nation? Is there such a
thing as a singular will of an otherwise heteroclite collective? Is
there any use to distinguishing between the state and the polity? Should
sovereignty be regarded as fixed, static, or otherwise bound to a
certain set of prevailing conditions? Can sovereignty, or political
agency at large, be emergent? Are nations, or other
[ostensibly/actually] organic collective wholes, indivisible? Is their
treatment as entities per se, justified? Can a nation emerge from within
another nation, or more generally, an organically linked group come to
form from within another one? And what does that say about the quality
of the original qua organic?

1.4 The target audience of STSNS is the informed citizen, politician, or
researcher who is willing to critically reflect on the issues examined
herein. You do not need to be a philosopher. Just be prepared to
entertain a thought without accepting it in advance.

1.5 STSNS expects you to take it seriously and invest time in it. Fear
not; it is a short piece.

1.6 While philosophical, this book does not conform to the stereotype of
being flamboyant. No obscure language is used. Common terms are not
given a mystical, 'profound' meaning that only insiders can grasp. The
signification attached to a technical term remains constant
throughout. No charlatanry. Sentences are concise. Everything is
explained in context and is structured in a logical way.

1.7 Obscurity is our bane. Clarity is our friend. As such, it is
important we subscribe to two rules of thumb:

- **Rule of plainness.** Between two equally correct explanations, the
  one with the simpler language should be used.
- **Rule of frankness.** Terms should not be intentionally used to
  deceive or to obfuscate meanings.

1.7.1 Any deviation should be considered a serious fault of the author.

2 This book is written in the form of *structured text*.

2.1 Structured text is an indexed (numbered) series of thoughts. Each
chapter's first paragraph starts with `1`, and the number is incremented
accordingly. When there is a thematic shift, it is increased
by 1. Otherwise it is increased by 0.1. The latter is called the level
of "depth". Some statements increase in depth, so that a statement with
three numbers, such as `2.2.1` marks the first comment on statement
`2.2`. And so on.

2.2 At first sight, this may not seem intuitive or anyhow superior to
the standard essay. Indeed, it is a different paradigm: more suitable to
a study that unfolds over multiple sessions. For such cases, I find this
format to be more accommodative than the essay. You can tell from the
structure alone where one line of reasoning starts and where it
ends. Referencing statements also becomes easier. Just note the index
and the chapter's title.

2.2.1 It is why my last two publications on philosophy follow this
approach:[^PhilPubs] a philosophical opus is typically read more than
once.

2.3 The reason for adding "structured text" to the title is three-fold:

- Being conscious of the presentation can help optimise for it. A book
  is useful only if it communicates well.
- Explaining the format is necessary because it is not standard. Knowing
  those details will help you read through this book.
- The irregularity of this particular presentation is the inline
  comment, or else what we will be referring to as the "interposed
  statement". This is a sentence, or series thereof, placed *right
  before* the statement or paragraph being referenced. Their function is
  ancillary. Typically to express a tangential thought, or to add a
  short summary. Think of interposed statements as verbose
  marginalia. Normally, you would want to read them, though that is not
  strictly necessary. They can be ignored, as they do not expand on the
  line of reasoning that is being developed.

_;; Interposed Statements are styled differently._

2.3 Interposed Statements are always formatted in *italics* and are
declared/initiated with a double semicolon sign `;;`.

2.3.1 Those familiar with programming will notice the parallel to source
code documentation. Comments in between the actual content. Good
documentation is a sign of well formulated code. This is no
different. Structured text is about clarity. Keeping things
understandable already at the syntactical level.

2.3.2 Ideally, structured text would benefit from all the innovations
computers bring to typography. Text highlighting for instance. Or "line
folding" that could toggle the visibility of sections on and off (such
as hiding all interposed statements). But because the reader may eventually
print this out, such possibilities are not explored any further. We rely
on conventional methods of typography.

_;; Why this book?_  
_;; The public dialogue needs an upgrade._

3 Sovereignty, nationhood, statehood form the core tenets of modern
politics. The international world order is based on them. Indeed, the
very notion of "inter-national" would be meaningless without the
construct of the nation. Similarly, the idea of independent nation
states would be impractical without an understanding of what
independence entails.

3.1 The purpose of this book is to develop a clearer understanding of
the 'bigger picture' of politics. It is an attempt to both explore and
re-appraise notions that are assumed as common knowledge or
self-evident. Ultimately, this serves the purpose of formulating a new
or enriched appreciation of the magnitudes that underpin quotidian
political phenomena. Better knowledge of the core tenets of modern
politics will help avoid confusion, common errors, and crass
misunderstandings.

_;; Social media tends to skew reality._  
_;; Extremes enjoy disproportionate exposure._

3.2 This is a time where politics is very reactive and
emotionally-driven. Demagogues are forcing their way into the
forefront. Coupled with the opportunism and short-termism of social
media as well as its propensity for favouring echo chambers and filter
bubbles, the cumulative effect is a degradation of the public dialogue's
quality. Reasonableness gives way to dogmatism. Populism becomes the new
normal, complemented by widespread misinformation and poor journalistic
ethics. And while a 'populist anti-populism' may seem tempting, it too
would have to appeal to the people's base instincts, ultimately
accommodating an arena for trolls and fanatics to battle it out. That is
a race to the bottom.

3.3 Rationality and deliberation have no substitutes. Those in search of
alternatives to the populist juggernaut had best review things they
consider basic before going any further. Challenge the underlying
assumptions, the main assertions. Think: *what is it that makes
sovereignty necessarily national?* Or, to put it in terms of the
European integration process, *why is integration always equated to
'power transfers' and a loss of sovereignty?*

3.4 Take this book as an impetus to reflect on these and relevant
topics. STSNS may not necessarily exhaust any one topic. It will,
however, urge you to contemplate on the propriety or adequacy of your
beliefs. A rethink is key to changing the parameters of the public
debate.

4 Each chapter of this book tackles a single theme in this order: (i)
sovereignty, (ii) nation, (iii) state, (iv) nation state.

4.1 Each chapter builds on the findings of its preceding one.

4.2 While the chapters can, for the most part, stand on their own, the
reader is expected to study them in their defined sequence.

5 The *Structured Text on Sovereignty, Nationhood, Statehood* is
distributed **free of charge**, under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike License (CC BY-SA), version 4.0.

5.1 This book's canonical URL is an extension of my website at
[protesilaos.com/stsns](https://protesilaos.com/stsns/).

[^PhilPubs]: The works are: (i) [Notes on the Modes of
    Scepticism](https://protesilaos.com/notes-modes-scepticism)
    (2017-07-28), (ii) [Prolegomena to a study of
    Metaethics](https://protesilaos.com/prolegomena-study-metaethics)
    (2017-08-11).

## What is sovereignty

1 In essence, sovereignty is supreme political authority within the
confines of a political order. It is:

- The power that overrides every other.
- The justification for governance.
- The enabler of governance.
- The boundary to governance.

1.1 Supreme political authority is the equivalent of "the main *archy*"
(from Greek αρχή). It denotes a political order with a locus of power,
or else a system where [more] power is concentrated somewhere.

1.1.1 The absence of an archy is a state of *anarchy*.

1.1.2 This should be disambiguated from the ideologies of anarchism
which, strictly speaking, want to set up an instituted system, albeit a
distributed one.

1.1.3 An "instituted system" means a political order. It is the product
of convention, not the state of nature.

1.2 Sovereignty is always expressed through—is made manifest in—an
agent.

1.2.1 If supreme political authority rests in a person, then that person
is *the sovereign*. There is an identification between the magnitude of
sovereignty and the agency. Or else, the magnitude is personalised.

1.2.2 Whereas, in the modern era, sovereignty is found in a more
abstract construct: the nation. The nation *as such* is the
sovereign. Yet, unlike a person, the nation is *impersonal*.

1.2.2.1 Sovereignty understood as *national sovereignty* is expressed
through forms of political organisation and modes of governance that are
supposed to be consistent with that nation's culture or traditions.

1.3 Sovereignty conforms with the dual cardinal function of political
organisation: recognition and confirmation.

1.3.1 The sovereign is recognised as such either explicitly or
implicitly insofar as it remains undisputed. Tacit recognition is the
lowest requirement.

1.3.2 Serious challenges to supreme political authority suggest an
implosion of the status quo.

1.3.3 Confirmation is the ongoing approval of the recognised supreme
political authority. It can also be explicit or implicit.

1.3.4 The absence of disputes hints at the lowest minimum of
confirmation. Supreme political authority is allowed to function
unencumbered, while its subjects keep on with their daily
activities. That suggests a compromise between at least two mutually
exclusive options: (i) upsetting the establishment without a clear
understanding of what may follow, or (ii) committing to life as usual
because the current order is preferable to an unpredictable state of
affairs.

1.3.5 The democratic equivalents to recognition and confirmation, those
of legitimacy and accountability, set a higher bar for the normative
aspects of sovereignty, in conformity with the principles of
democracy. So that, for instance, accountability is assessed in
accordance with expected procedures and objective criteria rather than
just the absence of internal strife.

1.3.5.1 These are differences of degree not substance. While of
paramount importance to politics, they are of tangential relevance to
metapolitics: a study that seeks to understand things at their formal
level.

1.3.6 The idea is that even an absolute despot must enjoy some kind of
consent. At least a close group of associates must act in concert with
the authority. Else there can be no supreme political authority, for
power of this kind does not hinge on the physical capacity of a person
to exert control over others. That is severely limited.

1.3.7 Without a modicum of recognition/confirmation (a state of
anarchy), other forces within the political order would eventually seek
to gain sovereignty. Alternatively, a supreme political authority, or
institutional arrangement with the same effect, would have to be devised
in an attempt to dissuade such opportunists.

_;; The ideal of democratic sovereignty._  
_;; This assumes a working, modern democratic system._

1.4 For democracies, sovereignty is initially conceived as a composite
of the dual cardinal function of political organisation and the values
of popular rule (by, with, for the people). This gives us the magnitudes
of legitimacy (recognition) and accountability (confirmation).

1.4.1 In essence, democratic life is the interplay between legitimacy
and accountability; a feedback loop between the body of citizens and the
group of their representatives. Citizens grant authority to their
representatives to engage in governance. This makes representative rule
legitimate (assuming consistency with the legal order). In turn,
representatives act in ways that demonstrate their commitment to the
promotion of the public interest. They answer to their electorate.

_;; Political organisation is continuous._  
_;; Legitimation and accountability occur all the time._

1.4.2 Legitimacy is not validated once at the point of its
assignment. It is confirmed incessantly through the political
process. This is what accountability is about. Representatives must
demonstrate that they are performing the task of governance in the
service of the public interest *at all times*.

1.4.2.1 Legitimacy and accountability are two sides of the same coin
(hence the notion of a dual cardinal function of political
organisation). An official entity can only be legitimate if it may be
held accountable. Otherwise it is abusive in proportion to the
competences conferred to it and the adequacy of the means for assessing
its operations.

1.5 The dual cardinal function of political organisation is not
actualised in a cultural-historical vacuum. Each political order has a
set of criteria that regulate the various aspects of quotidian
life. While forms and content may vary considerably, these range from
statutes to customs. In the modern era, the standard is a corpus of law
that consists of several branches, each with a particular application on
a facet of daily life. At its foundation is the primary law, or else the
constitution. Every law must be aligned with it. Complementary to the
legal order is a vast body of rules of custom regulating various aspects
of social activity and the political process in a more decentralised,
bottom-up fashion (since these are not strictly enshrined in law and are
not enforced by the judiciary).

_;; The democratic feedback loop expressed through the regulation of
political processes._

1.5.1 The relationship between the legal order and governance is
reciprocal. Laws represent a political order's commitment to comply with
predictable procedures that prevent instances of abuse or tyranny. In a
sense, these can be understood as short term restraints. But only as
temporary and limited in nature.

1.5.2 The legal order is not exogenous to the political entity. It is
the body of citizens, mostly through their representatives, that makes
the laws. Every rule is subject to change. Some may be more difficult to
amend, such as the constitution, but that does not alter the fact that
all laws are conventional.

1.5.3 Strictly speaking, laws do not constrain supreme political
authority. For law is an expression of sovereign will. They may limit
the actions of the government, or of decision makers in general. Such
bodies are performing the function of governance, which is not
equivalent to sovereignty. Their nomination rests on sovereignty. Their
operations do not exhaust it.

_;; Democratic sovereignty is not limited to the powers of the
government. Do not forget the people._

1.5.3.1 There are two ways to appreciate this insight:

- If supreme political authority is limited by another force, then it is
  not *supreme*.
- Democratic sovereignty is initially conceived as the composite of the
  dual cardinal function of political organisation
  (recognition/confirmation or else legitimacy/accountability) and the
  norms and values of popular rule. Democratic sovereignty thus
  encompasses both the actual powers of the state apparatus and the
  broader capacity of the people to legitimise and to hold accountable
  their authorities.

1.5.4 Democratic sovereignty is thus subdivided into *state sovereignty*
and *popular sovereignty*. These work in concert.

1.5.5 State sovereignty contains the powers peculiar to governance
(legitimacy) and the accompanying obligations (accountability). While
popular sovereignty describes the functions whereby the people grant
legitimacy to the various parts of the state apparatus and then proceed
to confirm it through the political process.

1.6 Democratic sovereignty in its outline form is the result of the
interplay between the body of citizens and the group of
representatives. This, however, is a description that does not
correspond to any actual political order. It ignores the temporal
dimension, which is embedded in the underlying culture and codified in
the legal system.

_;; The legal order reflects historical evolution._

1.6.1 The underlying culture and the legal order must be understood in
terms of temporality. A continuous evaluation, adaptation, and
enforcement of effective morality. Culture and its expression in law
maps the evolution of applied ethics to rules that have effect
throughout the political order.

1.6.1.1 When law makers pass a new piece of legislation, they are in
effect expressing the prevailing collective response to the task at
hand. This is contingent on the circumstances and, thus, subject to
change over time.

1.6.2 While considering the relationship between the democratic feedback
loop and the underlying culture, it is appropriate to think in terms of
*temporalities*. In other words, to understand that what happens in
day-to-day politics unfolds at a rate that is not necessarily
synchronous to the pace of change that determines a political order's
legal or moral tradition.

1.6.3 Asynchronous temporalities can explain the gradual phases a people
goes through in its history. Why a people cannot just vote to break free
from the cultural-historical path it follows. It rather is the
cumulative effect of incremental changes that can bring about such a
wide-ranging transition over the longer term.

1.6.3.1 The very phenomenon of a major paradigm shift is only graspable
with the benefit of historical hindsight.

1.6.4 Sovereignty seen from a macro historical perspective is trapped in
the web of its present time. Even instances of revolution—presumably
measures for accelerated radical reform—are more likely than not to be
held back by such inertia.

_;; There is no clean slate._  
_;; People start from somewhere in terms of their current state of
knowledge, beliefs, values._

1.6.4.1 Consider how the American Revolution developed a system of
representative democracy where the President is not too dissimilar to a
monarch, in terms of their powers. Or how the French Revolution paved
the way for Napoleon (an emperor, nor a democrat, the historical
circumstances notwithstanding). In more recent times, how the Arab
Spring largely failed to deliver the speedy democratic transition it was
touted to. France eventually broke free from its old order, even though
its semi-presidential system has retained certain features of
monarchy. Similarly, countries where the Arab Spring took place may
eventually realise their original ambition in the future.

1.6.4.2 The point remains: there is no escaping a cultural-historical
path. Certainly not in the sense of changing *everything* at once, from
the roots to the branches.

1.6.4.3 Whatever the agency of sovereign will, it is not derived *from
nothing* nor does it operate *in nothing*. It always springs from and is
immersed in a given cultural-historical environment. It exists within
those boundaries.

1.6.5 The notion of an absolute sovereignty would have to be qualified
as "absolute in the sense of being uncontested". That would still
confine it to the broader magnitudes of historical evolution. If,
however, "absolute" means decontextualised or transcendent, then there
is no such thing as absolute sovereignty. All sovereignty comes from a
cultural-historical milieu and remains couched in those terms.

_;; Introducing the distinction between headline and effective
sovereignty._

2 Supreme political authority is not limited to a legal or normative
claim on all the rights and responsibilities—the concrete powers and
potentiality—of ruling over a political order.

2.1 Supreme political authority refers to the highest form of authority
within the political whole. The main archy. "Who governs". Other notions
of sovereignty that are bound to some sense of propriety, such as the
democratic sovereignty described above, are matters of convention.

2.1.1 "Conventional" signifies that which is in conformity with the
prevailing practical morality: with what is considered appropriate in
the given time and space.

_;; Headline sovereignty is supreme political authority on paper._

2.2 To signify the facet of sovereignty that is aligned with convention,
we borrow a term from economics: headline. *Headline sovereignty*
describes the state of affairs as it ought to be in accordance with the
established rules of custom and legal principles. It is the indicator of
supreme political authority within a political order that is unadjusted
for the prevailing circumstances.

2.2.1 The economist employs the term "headline" as a shorthand for
denoting that the indicator under consideration does not describe things
in fullness. For example, headline inflation does not tell us anything
about the general price level's adjustments resulting from fluctuations
in energy prices.

2.2.2 In the modern era, headline sovereignty is enjoyed by nation
states that are internationally recognised as such.

_;; Effective sovereignty is supreme political authority in practice._

2.3 The adjustment to the actual conditions gives us *effective
sovereignty*. It refers to supreme political authority within a
political order as it actually stands.

2.3.1 The term "effective" is used to signify that which is in effect;
the one that holds true in practice. Similar to how we employ the
concept of "effective control".

_;; The equality of states pertains only to headline sovereignty._

2.4 In an ideal scenario headline and effective sovereignty are
matched. All entities that enjoy headline sovereignty also have the
capacity to exercise effective sovereignty to a degree commensurate with
it. That, however, necessitates a global equilibrium where every
political order is equal to all others in terms of its capacity for
effective sovereignty.

2.4.1 In the absence of such an equilibrium, there can only be instances
of a mismatch between headline and effective sovereignty. Either
magnitude exists in greater proportion to the other.

_;; Power understood as a set of factors of effective sovereignty._

2.5 Whether we refer to perfect symmetry between political orders, or
the lack thereof, we are hinting at the power each entity wields. Where
powers are equal, there is an equilibrium of the sort here
considered. Where they are not, some entities enjoy greater effective
sovereignty at the expense of the rest.

2.5.1 Power is a broad term. Perhaps a description that is more
conducive to further research is "factors of effective
sovereignty". This covers any state of affairs or driver that enables or
otherwise enhances the capacity to exercise supreme political authority
under the circumstances.

2.5.2 The factors of effective sovereignty are context-dependent. Here
is a short enumeration of some of the most obvious and common ones, with
the proviso that these are not necessarily discreet and independent of
each other: economic robustness, reduced exposure to environmental
risks, internal peace, capacity to leverage the knowledge base for
formulating policy, reliable military that dissuades aggressors while
backing diplomatic initiatives, credible alliances.

_;; Examples of the factors of effective sovereignty._  
_;; While non-exhaustive, these should give a fair idea of the concept._  
_;; Ultimately though, the factors need to be appreciated in the specifics of each case._  
_;; This is not a check list. It has to follow an evaluation of what
applies under the circumstances._

2.5.2.1 A political order with sound finances may be in a better
negotiating position when it comes to signing a relevant deal. It has a
higher chance to get things its way. That makes fiscal/financial
solidity a factor of effective sovereignty within those circumstances.

2.5.2.1.1 Those following EU politics can relate this to the dominant
position of Germany during the years of the euro crisis, compared to the
countries of the European South.

2.5.2.2 Internal peace is contingent on a number of issues, such as the
rule of law, fair burden sharing, solidarity between the people, equal
opportunities, an inclusive body politic that does not marginalise
communities. Internal peace renders the people more likely to act in
support of each other in the face of a common challenge to their way of
life. The absence of internal peace makes it easier to undermine the
political order's capacity to wield supreme political authority (divide
and conquer).

2.5.2.2.1 A relevant example would be homegrown terrorist cells. They
mostly develop in places where marginalised communities and parallel
societies are present. At its extreme, social exclusion can be likened
to a time bomb that is placed at the political order's foundations.

_;; Politics and supreme political authority are inseparable._

3 Supreme political authority is inherent to a political order.

3.1 The absence of a political order is the state of nature. The only
constant therein is the rule of might exercised through the use of brute
force (law of the jungle).

3.2 What distinguishes the various applications of sovereignty from each
other is the distribution of power and control across the members of the
political order. Those are the modal features: whether we refer to a
personalised or an impersonal sovereign, the rule of one or the rule of
many, the concentration or diffusion of power, the compulsory or
consensual nature of inter-personal relations and social experiences,
and so on.

3.2.1 "Modal" denotes a feature that is specific to a mode of being. So
not just that something is, but the exact way in which it is.

## What is the nation

1 The nation is a potential impersonal agent of sovereign will.

1.1 By "agent" we refer to the subject that forms sovereign will. The
prevailing conditions in which agency is made manifest constitute the
"structure", the objective magnitude.

1.2 By "potential" we indicate that we account for circumstances that
could hinder or altogether prevent sovereign will formation. The
capacity to act is not realisable independent of the structure. Action
is not absolute.

1.2.1 The need to factor in the circumstances hints at the distinction
between headline and effective sovereignty. What appears "on paper",
that which ought to be, does not necessarily correspond to reality.

1.3 And by "impersonal" we signify the nature of this entity as a
collective. It is in contradistinction to other types of sovereign
agency, where a person is touted as the embodiment of supreme political
authority or as the personification of the state.

1.4 What exactly amounts to a nation remains imprecise. The lack of a
physical, readily identifiable presence leads to ambiguity. A nation
can, at first, be any of the following:

- A culturally defined group of people, without access to an integrated
  political order (stateless nations, diasporas, ethnic minorities
  residing outside the boundaries of their 'parent' nation's territorial
  confines).
- A legally defined group of people, without a common identity, or, with
  a loose overarching cultural affiliation (newly-formed states
  comprising multiple cultural nuclei, decisively multicultural
  societies, the possibility of a nation that emerges from a union of
  nations).
- Combinations of the above, with either of the two contributing to the
  formation of the other.

_;; Cultural-historical constructs._  
_;; Nations are not limited to biological factors._

1.4.1 As to where genetics fit in this description, the consideration
has to be two-fold: (i) a common culture can be the natural extension of
shared ancestry, even though it is not limited to it nor is culture a
function of kinship, and (ii) if biology were an irreducible factor of
nationhood, then only biologically homogeneous nations would exist as
natural constants.

1.5 Regardless of their origins as cultural-historical or legal
constructs, nations can only function as agents of sovereign will
formation if they are inwardly homogeneous.

_;; Inward homogeneity is a nation's sense of self._

1.5.1 Homogeneity of this sort pertains to the group's
self-awareness. Each individual identifies with their nation, in
whatever terms the mutual bond may be defined in.

1.5.2 If the members of a given nation do not feel any connection to it,
or swear allegiance to another collective, then the presumed nation
cannot exercise sovereignty *as a nation*. A subset may claim to be
representing the totality of the group, forcing its will on the
rest. But in such cases, the nation exists as an inwardly homogeneous
whole *in name only*.

1.5.3 There is, nonetheless, an element of temporality involved. At any
given period, a nation may be fragmented, such as in instances of
internal strife, or ideological divides like the Cold War. The
fragmentation can be fully evaluated as temporary or as the new
normality only with the benefit of historical hindsight. Amidst the
events, all that can be said is that the nation is not operating as a
singular agent of sovereign will formation.

1.5.4 Temporality or, more generally, the prevailing conditions, can
explain cases where one presumed nation has more than one states or,
conversely, where multiple nations form part of a greater nation.

2 Inward homogeneity and its byproducts are here defined as a nation's
irreducible quality of "inwardness".

2.1 From a macro historical perspective, nations develop organically as
collectives with a tendency for inward solidarity, that can culminate
through means of supreme political authority. The sense of belonging is
the basis for shared experiences and the further development of norms
and value systems. These engender a belief in togetherness: a commitment
to the nation.

2.1.1 The term "organic" should not be interpreted as denoting
biological factors.

2.1.2 An organism is a distributed, self-sustaining system.

2.1.3 A system is a nexus of variable factors that produces local and
global effects germane to the factors' joint presence. It is a set of
relations that gives rise to emergent phenomena.

2.1.4 Emergent is the phenomenon that can only be discerned in the joint
operation of its contributing factors, never in each factor's isolated
state.

2.1.5 Put concretely, an organic whole is one that is sustained without
incessant outside intervention.

2.2 The sense of togetherness that is peculiar to nations is derived
from within the operations of the nations' particulars. It is
endogenous.

2.3 Unlike a tribe, nations need not share a common ancestry in the
strict sense. Blood ties are secondary to the shared sense of
belonging. The belief in the collective, in the very presence of a body
that encompasses and binds together individuals, leads to a fundamental
generalisation: individuals do not have to share any specific connection
to their fellow nationals in order to feel close to them. The mere
understanding that they belong to the same nation is a reliable starting
point for developing virtuous relationships both at a personal and a
political level.

2.4 Affinity can be understood in terms of affirmation or
negation. Concerning the latter, it can be formulated in juxtaposition
to a dissimilar presence. The sense of feeling closer to a fellow
national can be reinforced by comparing them to individuals or groups
thereof of a different background. A "we-they" method. Whereas the
affirmative approach develops the parts of the identity that are
peculiar to the nation: the shared experiences, historical images,
values and representations, etc.

2.4.1 National identity does not necessarily commit to any one of these
approaches. It can be a combination of affirmation and negation.

2.5 Inwardness is but a propensity. Be it as a whole or in either of its
components of togetherness and solidarity.

2.5.1 A propensity is not a constant, not an absolute value that holds
true regardless of the prevailing conditions. It is context dependent.

2.5.1.1 As such, the term "propensity" is more of a way of denoting that
individuals feel close to—or express solidarity towards—their fellow
nationals "during the good times", or "under normal circumstances", or
even "when the entire nation is compelled to act united". It is a way of
noting the possibility that a given nation does not exhibit holistic
inwardness at any one point in time. Put differently: that it exhibits
inwardness in a limited, selective, or incomplete fashion.

2.5.1.2 For instance, structural violence, segregation, social
inequalities, and other forms of injustice indicate the absence of
holistic inwardness. What consolidates a nation's inwardness, its
propensity for solidarity and for togetherness, is the appropriate
configuration of norms and institutions.

2.6 The primacy of inwardness as the defining feature of a nation does
not preclude kinship. There can be nations that are *biologically
homogeneous*, while still sustaining an identity with their peculiar
magma of traditions and values. They can exist as a very big family of
sorts.

_;; Do not think of nations as natural constants._

2.6.1 Such a possibility needs to be backed up by sufficient evidence,
which is outside the scope of this work. Defer to anthropology and
neighboring fields of research. In the absence of sufficient evidence,
claims on a common ancestry are more a product of ideology, ill designed
research methods, or pseudoscience. They might hint at a kernel of
truth, though not the entirety of it.

2.6.2 Furthermore, whether biology can actually be a predictor of
nationhood remains open to scrutiny. There has to be sufficient proof
that points at a causal link between blood relations and
cultural-historical artefacts. Biology would need to be defined as the
primary cause or, at least, as a major contributing factor of collective
experience and development. Unless that is proven to be the case, a
nation's inner workings must be tentatively considered independently of
genetics.

3 A nation is a broadly distributed interpersonal—an
emergent—phenomenon.

3.1 The nation is impersonal. It is not made manifest in any given shape
or form. It is amorphous.

3.2 A nation's presence is contingent on the common belief of its
existence among its members. Individuals forming the nation must have a
shared faith in its presence. Only then the nation actualises as an
inwardly homogeneous group bound by a spirit of togetherness and
solidarity.

3.2.1 A group of people becomes a nation when it develops the credence
of its identity to a point where it organically exhibits inward
homogeneity.

3.2.2 The organic quality is paramount. It introduces the temporal
magnitude, so that the nation is confirmed as such
intergenerationally. Otherwise any like-minded group would be virtually
indistinguishable from a nation.

3.2.3 The other element that is essential, is the sense of being close
to people who are complete strangers. Again, that distinguishes the
nation from a club. Nationals feel related to each other even when they
have never met. They can assume that they have many things in common and
that they are more alike than compared to people from a different
background.

3.2.4 Each individual may have a particular idea of what the nation is
or means to them. What matters is the common denominator. A set of
factors that all can recognise and agree to.

3.2.5 Language, shared traditions, a history of proximity and close
affiliation, would be obvious markers.

3.2.6 However, there is no exhaustive list of criteria, nor is there a
requirement that all of them are met. Different nations exhibit
different features.

3.2.6.1 For example, Americans are a nation of immigrants. The United
Kingdom is a nation of nations. Germany and Austria are considered two
separate nations even though there have been times in their history
where they were seen by some as different political organisations of an
otherwise singular nation. Russia is a nation that includes, among
others, diverse groups of people each with its own republic within the
Russian federation.

3.2.6.2 Nations can exhibit unique characteristics. That is to be
expected. They are formed in a cultural-historical context. Each set of
conditions is likely to be specific to a given time and place.

_;; A nation is contingent on convention._

3.3 A nation has to be cultivated in the mind as such. Biological
factors are not sufficient to bind together a large group of strangers,
especially in the absence of a common basis for establishing political
constructs.

3.4 Ultimately that hints at the centrality of ideology. A nation can be
made to be. It can form from within another nation, emerge from a union
of nations, or be developed from an arbitrary assemblage of people that
are initially only related to each other by mere circumstance.

## What is the state, what is the polity

1 The dichotomy between headline and effective sovereignty carries over
to the distinction between the state and the polity.

1.1 States may enjoy headline sovereignty, but conditions can be such
that [part of] effective sovereignty is exogenous to them. The
ramifications are understood in the appropriate context: inter-state or
inter-national relations.

1.2 The international dimension means that sovereign will formation is
not confined to the boundaries of any one state. A policy implemented at
the state level can have aspects that derive from international
conventions. It might even be the outright extension of an international
initiative, rather than self-determination in the narrowest sense.

1.3 Relations between states, insofar as they have implications on
collective decision making, reveal an emergent form of effective
sovereignty. The parties or the primary actors may be nation states. The
dynamic produced by their relationship is a case-dependent stratum of
supra-state (supra-national) political authority that is neither a
nation nor a state.

_;; Where is the locus of power?_

1.3.1 For as long as that supranational level can determine—or otherwise
provide the impetus for—collective will formation, it enjoys effective
sovereignty for the matters concerned. These types of supranational
authority may emanate from a trade agreement, the balance of power and
relevant struggles between states, and so on.

1.3.2 Seen from the perspective of policy—or a policy *framework*—, the
terms "state" and "polity" should not be treated as semantically
equivalent. The state is a given institutional order with defined
boundaries. It follows a certain cultural-historical path. It has its
own constitutional identity and practical morality. Whereas a polity is
emergent from within the specifics of the case. It is the source of a
given policy or set thereof: the province of effective sovereignty from
whence that policy initiative comes from.

1.3.2.1 For instance, a trade agreement *as such* has no normative
claims on supreme political authority. No headline sovereignty. It is
understood that the parties to the agreement hold rights. The agreement
itself is a token of their shared capacity to exercise them. Yet the
agreement has implications on the distribution of effective sovereignty,
in that it forces conditions on the parties to it, while enabling a
range of possible courses of actions that was theretofore unavailable.

_;; The polity is elusive._

1.3.3 So *where is the locus of power* for the items—the relevant areas
of policy—that concern the agreement? It is not instantiated in any one
of the parties to it. It is emergent from the case as such.

1.3.3.1 "Emergence" in this context means circumstances-specific and
greater than the parts in isolation. The conditions themselves bring
about that eventuality. Furthermore, "emergence" here denotes the
presence of a stratum of effective sovereignty, *without* it being a
[new] state or nation. This stratum comes into effect dynamically. It
remains a function of the circumstances that bring it about. It ceases
to be, in the way or extent that it is, when its contributing factors
change.

_;; State and polity are the same in a decontextualised state._  
_;; This, however, is a product of thought, with no correspondence to
any case._

1.4 Assuming a sovereign nation as such, a nation state *in its own
right*, the magnitudes of state and polity are indistinguishable. All
authority comes from and is limited to the state. However, consider the
broader framework of global affairs. It is a complex web of relations
between nation states. Each set of relations generates its own
dynamics. The implications on effective sovereignty can vary. Against
this backdrop, it is more likely that "state" and "polity" are
decoupled.

1.4.1 The state can be likened to a constant. It is static. It is there
as a legal personality. In contradistinction, the polity is dynamic. It
only appears in instances where relations between states give rise to a
supra-state level of political authority.

1.5 A polity is a policy-[framework-]specific form of supreme authority
that is derived from the relationship between states, or between
political orders in general.

1.6 Headline sovereignty is always enjoyed by a personified or
impersonal state. In the modern era, the latter is a nation state.

1.6.1 Effective sovereignty can come from a locus that is not recognised
as either a nation or state in the strict sense. Still, the distinction
drawn herein may be more difficult to discern in actual politics.

1.6.1.1 Consider the complex phenomenon of the European Union. The EU is
not a nation. Yet there is no doubt that it exercises effective
sovereignty over the areas of policy that have been conferred to the
European level. Similarly, the EU is not a state, properly so called. It
is a union of nation states that is best described as a federal system
with its fair share of idiosyncrasies. Again, that does not prevent it
from exercising supreme political authority over matters it has
competence over.

1.6.1.1.1 Is the EU a state or a polity? Why? It is static, well
defined, not emergent from evolving circumstances. As such, the problem
is a matter of semantics, where "state" can mean different things as
nation state or as an administrative entity within a federation. Perhaps
then, the EU is a political order that can be named a "republic".

1.6.1.1.2 What is a trade agreement, such as the proposed TTIP, in terms
of its impact on effective sovereignty? It forms a polity for the issues
it encompasses and remains irrelevant for all the others.

2 To further elaborate on the dichotomy between the state and the
polity, consider the factors of statehood: (i) population, (ii)
territory, (iii) governance, (iv) outwardness. A state, properly so
called, must satisfy all of them.[^MontevideoConvention]

_;; The first factor of statehood is a permanent population._

2.1 The entity must have a permanent, replenishable population.

2.1.1 Seen from a broader historical vantage point, permanence implies
that the population does more-or-less identify itself as a
collective. It has an adequate degree of homogeneity that prevents a
part from trying to sever its ties with the rest of the body politic.

2.1.1.1 From the perspective of the factors of effective sovereignty,
the sense of belonging, kinship, or togetherness is of paramount
importance. It is the foundation of solidarity: a prerequisite to the
preservation of social peace. Togetherness produces a common bond
between the people and the structures that may make up a political
hierarchy. People can identify with the individuals and institutions
that rule over the populace where such a bond exists.

2.1.1.2 A population that thinks of its presence as a singular entity in
a cultural-historical sense, functions as a unified whole.

_;; Second factor of statehood is a defined territory._

2.2 The entity must control a certain space. It has to occupy a clearly
delineated territory.

2.2.1 Territoriality is a prerequisite of any political
order. Collective human experience, such as economic activity, occurs in
space. Whomsoever controls the space, can exercise political authority.

2.2.1.1 This is a litmus test for the establishment's capacity to wield
effective sovereignty at any given moment in time. It shows whether the
political order controls the media for the implementation of its
authority; to exercise powers that are characteristic of supreme
political authority, such as to levy taxes or maintain a standing army.

2.2.1.2 Territoriality may also suggest independence from external
influences, though this should not necessarily be the case. For as long
as there can be emergent forms of effective sovereignty, control over a
certain territory can only safely imply that the entity concerned enjoys
effective sovereignty over matters that pertain to this control only.

_;; Third factor of statehood is governance._  
_;; Governance ≠ government._

2.3 The political order must be capable of uninterrupted governance.

2.3.1 "Governance" is not the same as "government". The latter is an
institution. A collection of people that perform certain tasks in
accordance with a set of rules or expectations. Whereas the former is a
process: that of managing political affairs. A government engages in
governance.

2.3.1.1 Accounting for the first factor of statehood (population),
perhaps a more descriptive definition of governance is that of managing
political affairs *in accordance with the norms, traditions, rules, and
expectations of the self-conscious people*.

2.3.2 In the modern era, this would suggest that the political order has
a fully fledged legal system, credible institutions as well as
established processes for adopting decisions and/or resolving
disputes. These provide for predictability and make the authorities
recognisable among the populace. Permanent institutions are important
for confirming the idea of a common identity derived from the sense of
belonging. Subjects of governance can relate to the government.

2.3.3 A coherent legal-institutional order is a clear indication that
the society lives in peace and operates unencumbered by internal
strife. A single recognisable government does, among others, imply that
there are no warring factions vying for control. Any political disputes
are resolved with existing means within the available
procedures. Governance is consistent.

_;; The fourth factor of statehood is outwardness._  
_;; The entity can engage in relations with other political orders._  
_;; Not to be confused with the international recognition of nation
states._

2.4 The political order must have the means to engage in relations with
other entities, including other political orders.

2.4.1 This is not the same as the capacity to maintain an international
diplomatic presence. It is broader than that. It encompasses any kind of
recognition, acceptance, or approval of the political order as a
singular entity.

2.4.2 Outwardness is confirmed in relations between states, but also in
transactions with non-state actors, such as foreign investors willing to
enter in contractual arrangements with the political order and/or invest
in its domestic economy.

2.4.3 Outwardness covers any kind of partial or scoped recognition by
internationally recognised states. Such a scenario is the acceptance of
the political order as a singular entity within a certain context or for
a given process or even area of policy.

2.4.4 Outwardness is judged on the basis of its impact on effective
sovereignty. If exposure to the outside world can lead to benefits or to
virtuous cycles, then the political order demonstrates a capacity to
stand on an equal footing with internationally recognised states.

2.4.5 As such, outwardness is not the equivalent of formal recognition
from the international community. It is, nonetheless, the substance of
what renders a political order recognisable.

2.4.6 Formal recognition may amplify the effects of outwardness. But
amplification points at a difference of degree, not category. As such
formal recognition is not a factor of statehood per se. It is a
requirement for participating in the international community in a formal
capacity. Which means to enjoy headline sovereignty.

2.4.7 Formal recognition must satisfy the criterion of correspondence to
reality: the political order to be recognised as a formal state must
already satisfy the criteria of statehood, as these are understood under
the scope of effective sovereignty. Without such correspondence,
recognition is but a token, perhaps a diplomatic device for forwarding a
certain agenda. Formal recognition as such does not turn a political
order into a fully functioning state nor does it guarantee such a
condition.

3 The state is a defined apparatus. The polity is a
circumstances-dependent stratum from whence effective sovereignty comes
from. The locus of power can only be known by studying the contributing
factors of the case.

[^MontevideoConvention]: The factors of statehood presented herein are a
    re-evaluation and reformulation of the Montevideo Convention of
    1933.

## What is the nation state

1 The nation state is the alignment and consequent identification of the
three magnitudes of nation, state, homeland.

1.1 The nation qua potential impersonal agent of sovereign will
formation is actualised as sovereign through the state.

1.1.1 The nation is fastened upon the institutional architecture of a
state, in ways that one becomes a substitute for the other. National
sovereignty is thus synonymous with state sovereignty.

1.2 The state is the vehicle of national sovereign will. It exercises
supreme political authority, "in the name of" or "courtesy of" the
nation.

1.2.1 This implies a division of labour, or else a delegation of
competences. For if the state is the means through which the nation
realises its potential for sovereign will formation, then the nation *as
such* is reliant on another mechanism for its fulfillment.

1.2.2 It follows that the nation and the state are not one and the same,
despite their nominal identification. They are two distinct entities
that are impressed in the mind as one.

1.3 The feedback loop between the nation and the state hints at the dual
cardinal function of political organisation: recognition and
confirmation. The state draws its recognition (or legitimacy) from the
nation and remains answerable to it. This is not a requirement for
democracy per se, but a more generic commitment to use the state
apparatus in the service of the nation, in the promotion of the national
interest.

1.4 The homeland is the magnitude that the nation claims as its original
space.

1.4.1 The nation is identified with the homeland, so that belonging to a
certain country becomes the equivalent of belonging to the corresponding
nation.

1.4.2 The homeland is the physical expanse of the state. The area where
sovereign will is implemented in a manner that is considered a priori
rightful.

1.4.3 The homeland epitomises the nation's inwardness: the sense of
belonging among its members. One's country—and by extension the people
residing in it—is considered one's natural home.

2 At its core, nationalism is the ideology that identifies a nation to a
state and a homeland. We term as the "quintessential nationalist tenet",
the linkage between the nation and the state.

2.1 Couched in terms of the dual cardinal function of political
organisation, the nation is believed to recognise the state as the
vehicle of its sovereign will, while assuming the duty of confirming
said recognition.

2.1.1 It is why the state qua nation state is said to be the rightful
apparatus for the realisation of sovereign will.

2.2 The quintessential nationalist tenet introduces potential
disparities once realised. The state can be clearly defined as a set of
rules, institutions, and personnel wielding power. Whereas the nation,
in the context of the nation state, may remain open to interpretation.

2.2.1 The identification between the nation and the state is thought of
as permanent. There is no further criterion of sufficiency when it comes
to the dual cardinal function of political organisation: recognition and
confirmation. There is no need for a perfect match between the nation
and the state at any given point in time.

2.2.2 A state is assumed to be the rightful embodiment of national
sovereign will, regardless of the circumstances. A government can claim
to be acting in the name of the nation or to be pursuing the national
interest, without having to conform to any precise objective criterion
that would validate such assertions.

2.2.3 By the same token, an individual in office may purport to be the
personalisation of the national spirit, the leader who has captured the
essence of national will, and who proceeds to govern accordingly.

2.2.4 The lines are arbitrary. The only kind of measure for the impact
of such phenomena on the integrity of the linkage between the state and
the nation, is a negative one: the absence of internal strife. For as
long as there is cohesion *of the state*, for as long as it controls the
homeland, its claims on nationhood are taken at face value.

2.2.5 Even in instances of civil war, the state is thought to embody the
nation as a whole. Yet the nation that experiences fission cannot
simultaneously have a single medium of expression, for it has no
singular will.

2.2.6 The quintessential nationalist tenet places a very low bar for
drawing the identification between the magnitudes of the nation, state,
homeland. The very presence of the state, its ongoing functioning, is
considered sufficient.

2.2.7 The quintessential nationalist tenet is encapsulated in Article 3
of the *Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen* (1789 CE). It
stipulates that (my translation): *"The principle of all sovereignty
resides essentially in the nation; no body, no individual can exercise
authority that does not emanate expressly from
it"*.[^Ar3Declaration1789]

2.2.7.1 This article can be read as setting a very high bar for the
exercise of authority. That would indeed be the case were the nation—in
the context of the nation state—defined in precise terms. In the absence
of a definition, conditions that enable the exercise of authority may
vary considerably.

2.2.7.2 One possibility is the rule of might. The strongest force gains
a grip on power and proceeds to legitimise its authority by claiming to
serve the national interest.

2.2.7.3 Another scenario is the game of numbers characteristic of
representative democracy. Depending on voter turnout and how votes are
counted, a government can have a majority while representing a fourth or
fifth of the citizens. Whatever the numbers, there is no clear
demarcation line between representation that is not really
representative of the nation as a whole and one that is. Furthermore, it
is not clear whether a majority, however defined, can ever be equal to
the nation *as such*, which again brings the disparities of the
quintessential nationalist tenet to the foreground.

2.2.7.4 Ultimately though, there is no objective way of knowing with
absolute certainty when authority emanates expressly from the
nation. The evaluation is based on arbitrary arrangements of power and
control. If the established political order can maintain its claims on
nationhood, then it can just as well present its rule as the rule of the
nation, its interest as the national interest, and so on.

2.2.7.5 Let this be considered "nationalism's problem of
identification".

3 Nation states are the primary actors of world affairs.

3.1 World politics are understood as affairs between nations, hence
"inter-national". Whether it is about power struggles (localised or
regionalised), the promulgation of universal rights, regulations on
trade and other cross-border activities, the nation state remains at the
epicentre.

3.2 Nation states, in their capacity to exercise supreme political
authority, can be treated as moral agents.

3.2.1 A moral agent is one whose actions have moral value. By "moral
value" we mean that they are relevant to a discussion of morality, be it
in terms of the conditions they set or the consequences of their
behaviour.

3.2.1.1 For instance, human rights are enshrined in international law; a
covenant between nation states. In principle, the international
community assumes responsibility for enforcing and safeguarding all such
normative values.

_;; How does the nation, in the form of the nation state, have a
singular presence?_

3.3 Moral agency is assumed for the nation state as a whole. As such the
nation *itself* is thought to be engaging in behaviour with moral
value. It follows that internal injustices within a nation state are a
form of persistent self-contradiction. Which means:

- The nation qua nation state is thought to be expressing a singular
  will. It is treated not just as a group of people but as one entity.
- Nationalism's problem of identification is laid bare. The state, led
  by any given government, acts as it sees fit without *necessarily*
  exercising sovereignty that emanates expressly from the nation *as a
  whole*.

_;; How is the nation singular if there are groups within it that have
different orientations?_

3.3.1 Moral agency also has implications on nationalism's problem of
identification, especially in instances where parts of the nation seek
to break free from the established political order.

3.3.2 Rebel groups or regions that want to escape from their environing
nation state are treated as forces that aim at dividing the
nation. Whereas in their perspective, the environing order is being
abusive and is the one that prevents the expression of their own
nationhood.

_;; How can something be an integral whole and a heteroclite assemblage
at the same time?_

3.3.3 For nationalism this reveals a certain inconsistency. If the
original nation is an organic whole that is fully expressed in the
state, and if the state already occupies the totality of the homeland,
then any secessionist tendency would have to be assumed external to
it. It would make no sense for a homogeneous, contiguous, integral
entity to experience shifts that point at heterogeneity and
fragmentation.

3.3.4 Secessionists are endogenous though. They come from within the
established nation state. They have as their guiding principle the
formation of a new nation state, or if they do not, they arrive at that
point eventually, due to how the world order is arranged. Which means
that they too proceed to formulate their cause along the lines of the
quintessential nationalist tenet: a nation that identifies with a state
and occupies its natural habitat, else homeland.

4 Couched in terms of statehood, the nation in conjunction with the
homeland is a quasi-objective means of delineating spheres of influence;
of defining political hierarchies and divisions along lines that are
more-or-less identifiable and often touted as natural constants.

4.1 Any sort of arbitrariness is accepted as a feature of the world
order's prevailing conventions, even if tacitly so.

[^Ar3Declaration1789]: The [original Article
    3](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6c/Declaration_of_the_Rights_of_Man_and_of_the_Citizen_in_1789.jpg)
    of the *Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen* in French:
    *"Le principe de toute souveraineté reside essentiellement dans la
    nation, nul corps, nul individu ne peut exercer d'autorité qui n'en
    émane expressement."*
