---
title: "On dignity"
excerpt: "A work on philosophy by Protesilaos Stavrou about dignity."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "cje3uS9PuOg"
---

In today's video, I hiked for about an hour while expounding on the
philosophical theme of dignity.  This is the continuation of my
previous two presentations (each of which is ~1 hour long):

* About "sorry for being a burden":
  <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-10-31-sorry-for-being-burden/>.
* On the meaning and purpose of life:
  <https://protesilaos.com/books/2022-11-02-meaning-purpose-life/>.

It is not necessary to watch the previous two, as I summarise the
points relevant to dignity.  Though you may still want to watch or
listen to them as they contain lots of ideas.

Overview of what I talked about today:

* I made a mistake for saying that "today is Thursday".  It is Friday,
  4 November 2022.
* Explanation of the underpinnings of "sorry for being a burden".  In
  short, it consists of (i) selfcentredness, (ii) obsession that turns
  into a bias that reduces others into the opposite of what the object
  of obsession is, and (iii) a rationalisation that self-loathing or
  self-hatred is a virtue because the person only does it for the good
  of others.
* Self-loathing masquerading as altruism is not really altruistic
  because it still contains misanthropy (misanthropy==hatred of
  humans) for someone: the self.
* Note what "meaning" in life is.  Basically, it is a subjective
  evaluation of experiences in one's life that keeps them going.  When
  we find meaning in things we do, we continue doing them.
* I decouple "purpose" for meaning for reasons that I explain at
  length in the aforementioned presentation.  The gist is that we can
  have meaning without it.
* Dignity is the inherent worth of someone.  Loss of dignity is a
  subjective affair.  A state of mind where the person assess their
  worth and concludes that their life's experiences no longer have
  meaning.
* I don't think we can say anything about the subjectivity as such.
  If a person thinks they have no dignity, that is for them to say
  (this point is revisited and explained further in the video).
  Though we can still comment on matters surrounding the subjective
  evaluation as such.
* Consideration of examples that cover matters of tunnel vision, the
  balance in one's life experiences when seen holistically, and the
  dynamism of the case (basically, the lack of a person's omniscience
  and how that relates to hope).  I essentially ask the person to set
  a high bar and not take this issue lightly.
* Comment on matters of euthanasia and suicide in reference to the
  movie "Mar adentro".  In short: there comes a point where the person
  is stating in full conscience that their life has no meaning to
  them.  We should acknowledge their agency, the dignity inherent
  therein, and accept their decision.
* There cannot be an objective, one-size-fits-all criterion because
  that contradicts subjectivity.  What a person thinks of their own
  self is no longer relevant if some committee/authority decides on
  their behalf.  Generalising this means that dignity cannot exist, as
  each individual's inherent worth would be cancelled through the
  denial of their agency and capacity to know what they feel.
* More comments on suicide and how it is narrow-minded (i.e. wrong) to
  dismiss concerns for dignity as merely one seeking attention.

At several points in the video I show some breathtaking vistas and use
them as metaphors for our life.  We may be walking on a dirt road,
thinking that it is like all other dirt roads we have traversed
before.  But we do not know what we might find at the next turn.
