---
title: "The invisible man"
excerpt: "An essay about our unspoken desire for connection and the troubles we face in reconciling the internal with the external worlds."
---

This is a story I made up to comment on the troubles we face in
reconciling the internal with the external worlds.

* * *

Why is it so bright? The room is more spacious than before. Did I
renovate it last evening? That would explain why I am not used to the
increased levels of light. The walls are made out of glass. The entire
house is. How? I have no memory of changing my place outright. What I
have been doing is incremental refinements. Nothing makes sense here.
Yet it feels oddly familiar. Unconventional, yes, albeit austere in
its presentation. Were I to draw a design with such a style, I would
do it this way. But I did not. Yesterday was just another day of me
carrying out my routines. It was the same as the day before and so on
as far I can recall. Life is uneventful in these parts. Years go by
and all I can say is "more of the same." The paths I take during my
walks are the ones I always tread. The activities I engage in are
equally predictable. Even the reply I give to questions about my
latest news is increasingly formulaic: "things are stable and I am
happy" followed by a smile.

Where we are is the result of where we have been. It is the inevitable
combined cumulative effect of our choices and the happenstances we
have been subject to. There is no means of undoing what has
transpired. A change of direction is the second best alternative. It
is what gives us hope and inspires us to try again. Perhaps to be
someplace else or to become another, even if only marginally so. If we
observe our behaviour we can learn from it and work on the parts we do
not like. Yet we do not get to choose what we bear witness to.
Equipped with self-awareness, we explore the depths of our soul,
unearthing rare minerals, as it were, and discovering unspoken wealth.
In our naivety, we have no idea what kind of monsters lurk in the
depths. The discovery of whatever glitters incentivises us to continue
and to ignore the risks. There always are limits though. Those who
defy them suffer the consequences of their inability or unwillingness
to stop when they ought to. They should have paid attention to the
signs including the most obvious one of the ferocious three-headed
hound. Some never do, perhaps because only those who have the mental
fortitude to push the boundaries ever get to figure out where those
are. We have to avoid digging too deep into our psyche for there lies
an enriching world that is not ours; a world whose prevailing
conditions grow increasingly inimical to our presence the deeper we
reach; a world that is so close to us yet decisively otherworldly; a
world that will make us miserable. To know yourself too much is to
have seen the parts of it you cannot undo. Hope is the first casualty.

Avoid some preoccupations to be able to channel your energy to the
activities you care about the most, but do not eliminate them from
your life. Always do something. Create situations that require upkeep
and commit to their maintenance. Tend to them with care and return to
them with unmistakable regularity. Idleness gives us enough time to
direct our focus inward, since nothing out there calls for it. If we
are lucky, we will not go too far to where the unspoken horrors dwell
and only take back with us some of the wealth available there. Yet we
have no map of this domain, no clear idea of where the borders lie.
Some adventurers are concealed in the most conspicuous of places. It
is not their body that does the exploring, but their heart which longs
for states of affairs that differ from the ones they are immersed in.
The most competent and daring among them will go farther than the
furthest edges. They will only be brought back to us by whatever
commitments still bind them to this place. It is those activities we
all need to ultimately have a reason to stick around while we can.

A man of ideas is a man who hides in the open. When others find him,
he directs their attention to the corpus of theories he has elaborated
on and keeps them preoccupied with matters of thought. His fallback
plan once the discussion becomes personal is to put up that familiar
smile and utter the words "same as usual; good!" Nobody would be
interested enough to ask about the details of what appears to be a
dull life. Such is the assumption. Hiding like this is a form of
wanting to be discovered, except it is more eclectic than merely
seeking attention. There is a filter designed to keep the indecisive
ones out. Only those who are keen on finding the innermost self will
bother to circumvent whatever obstacles they encounter. The rest will
not consider it worth their time.

Why would anyone go through the travails? Do those culminate in some
supremely valuable reward? Or is the person in hiding mistaken as they
labour under the delusion that there is something special about them?
Some of us think we hold a treasure deep inside and our unspoken wish
is that a person worthy enough will eventually find it. The strategy
is to wait indefinitely for that adventurer who will not only look
into their own depths but into ours as well. Every so often we peek
through the window to check if anybody is approaching. The dirt roads
are always quiet, while the boisterous avenues are never about us.
With no-one in sight, we go back to playing our waiting game. The most
valuable resource we can expend is our moments. To give you my
undivided attention is to shower you with that which I have the least
of. There is no substitute for it, no memento nor gift that will ever
be as worthy. Whomever spends their vitality searching for you is
essentially making a sacrifice. Their effort is proof of their
commitment. Alas, time is not kind to those who live in waiting. It
relentlessly defaces everything that finds currency in our world.
Whatever worth we think we have is, at best, short-lived and less
important than we make it out to be. If we guard it too well, we all
but guarantee it goes to waste.

We can fear success just as much as failure. This happens when we grow
accustomed to the state of our inertia. To wait is to not take the
initiative and to hope that the world will deliver all we think we
deserve. The uneventful life is at once a regret and an achievement of
the highest order; the regret of not having tried to introduce a
change; the achievement of tolerating, indeed befriending, boredom.
For those accustomed to waiting, the challenge is whether their regret
remains such or turns into guilt and then despair. All that happens is
a matter of timing, of being in the right place at the right time.
Such is the intersection of choice and fortune which inevitably opens
up some possibilities while ruling out others. Certain places are
simply too far away even if they can be conceived of as the "right"
ones for us. We will not be there when it matters. Patience cannot
hold back the effects of time. Some gaps are unbridgeable. Whenever we
cannot recognise them, a couple of decades apart will help us see how
far off the mark our target is. The fear of success grips us each time
we desire to break the cycle but cannot muster the courage to try what
we understand is necessary. Our potential despair is that we do not
know how to get rid of what we have become. We have assumed as our own
a version of our selfhood which is content with feeling unfavoured and
ignored.

The hidden man who is not prepared to make the requisite changes will
probably panic if somebody gets close to his true location. He may
have the skills to venture off all alone into the murkiest depths, yet
therein lies his weakness and strength: solitude is his only long-term
companion. He never had to have a partner in his excursions. Perhaps
he never dared to try. To be with another requires that you slow down.
Did he never want it though? Or was his adventure nothing but a flight
from the attempt? Is each new trip of his but an excuse to not remain
still out of a concern that his position has been compromised? When
the heart does all the work, the body forgets how it is to act.
Success inspires fear just as much as failure because both will upset
the status quo. Some belief will be proven wanting, inviting another
to take its stead. In remaining hidden so well for so long, the man
has turned invisible, which condemns him henceforth to never be
discovered. When he figures it out, it will be too late for him to
become another.

What am I even thinking? These thoughts are not mine. Just like the
very place I am standing in, they have somehow been thrust upon me.
Yet I cannot dismiss them as alien. They do feel familiar. Maybe they
are manifestations of long suppressed feelings or the inklings of what
is to be elucidated. Recollection or premonition? Is there even a
difference in a world that never starts and ends? The thoughts do not
stop and I am powerless to withhold them.

To be found, to be recognised, to be noticed... all express the same
yearning for a connection, for partaking in an experience, for saying
nothing as you communicate everything. Forget the grand events. The
little things suffice. How nice would it be to observe the birds while
resting under the shade of the oak trees! A moment in eternity is
enough when it is sincere. Is that too much to ask for? And then, as
the sun sets and the nightingales sing, to express heartfelt gratitude
for having been there together. At that very place we discovered the
space where our separate lives were indistinguishable. To find a
fellow traveller requires that you are journeying. Not to the depths
though. Stay above ground where the rest are. Some paths converge only
to split off into divergent directions again, while others remain
united as far as the eye can see. We cannot foretell which will be the
road we meet on and end up with: it will all be with the benefit of
hindsight. The meeting is more likely to occur if we share the same
disposition to roam the open vistas while accepting serendipity. So
what if there is nobody there? We keep going. It just has to happen
once. Within glass walls there is nothing but stasis. Only museum
exhibits are kept there, for every passer by to see but for none of
them to touch. Once you escape the room, you can at least tell
yourself that you did your part. Will it matter if it comes to nought?
You will only know if you try.

As these ideas turn into words, I feel compelled to exit this place.
Why would I ever stay in a transparent room? Is this the logical
continuation of my eagerness to live in accordance with my precepts?
Am I now supposed to prove that hiding in the open is tenable? I am
here already so it seems I have no choice in the matter. Let me then
suspend my disbelief as to how this came to be and take on the
challenge. To find the others. Surely this is not too hard.

Oh, I am naked! Where did I even leave my clothes? There is no
furniture in sight. Nothing beside this bed. No sheets. Just a
mattress. It too is stripped down to its essentials. Anybody can see
me now for who I actually am. There is no more pretending I am not an
animal. Or can they? How would they be able to discern the person
within the body by observation alone? Is this not how anyone can hide
in the open by giving others an impression which ultimately brings to
the surface their preconceived notions? The naked ones will be judged,
sure, and will be called mean words. Witnesses will all have an
opinion about the spectacle. There will be a lot of talking regarding
propriety that will engender heated debates. Yet none of it will be
about who the person is. All such talk revolves around an avatar, the
idol of a human, that which is pictorial and representational in its
nature. The specific body then becomes but a proxy for all possible
bodies. Despite its quality as a particular, it reveals the universal
it partakes of. It is the latter we all discern only to then turn to
our own particulars. First impressions can be wrong and thus make for
unreliable final conclusions. We know. Though I wonder who cares the
most about getting a second chance in this regard. Do we even
establish that first contact which creates the conditions for more of
them. How will anybody get past the surface level if they have missed
that to begin with?

I cannot recognise my surroundings. They are not how I remember them
to be. I must have been extra productive yesterday. The whole area is
cleared from all vegetation. I also flattened the land it seems. I
feel no pain though. None whatsoever. Doing all this with my trusty
pickaxe would have surely placed tremendous stress on my muscles. I
seem alright and feel at the peak of my strength. At any rate, I have
to do something about this situation. Clothes or no clothes, I must
work with the information available to me. I am naked in a see-through
room. How embarrassing! I need to dress up and figure out where I am.
Then prepare for my return to the life I had. I even am fuzzy about
that right now. What was it like and what would I even do with it? If
the place we are is the result of where we have been, if past actions
have led me to this point, then returning to the prior state is surely
going to either lead me nowhere I want to be or put me in the same
predicament as this one. Scenaria! There are too many of them. I shall
act and figure it all out as I go.

What are those cypress trees doing there? They must have been growing
for decades. The ones I planted are less than two years old. That
trail to their side leads to what appears to be a sports complex. At
its other end is a workshop dealing with heavy machinery of some kind.
I will head rightward as I can see people playing tennis. It is
humiliating to approach them in this condition, but I have no better
option. They might know where we are. Maybe they will even be kind
enough to offer some garment to a fellow athlete. Even a towel is
better than nothing. "Hello folks! I just need the name of this
place." I am speaking as loud as I can. They are absorbed in their
game. Seems fun. "Not to bother you. It is not important anyway.
Cheers!" Tennis must be an engrossing activity. They both seem to have
not noticed me. Probably I need to be more forceful. At least I tried.

Opposite the court is a kiosk. I can discern five lads forming a
circle. Whatever it is they are talking about, they will surely spare
a few seconds for me. "Good day fellas! I am a tourist visiting your
beautiful country. I think I lost my way. Perhaps you can help me get
back to my hotel?" They speak in a foreign tongue. I cannot make sense
of it. The topic must be too important to them given how animated they
are. I will pretend nothing happened. "Oh, silly me! My phone has a
maps app. I can be so absentminded sometimes... Not to be a burden
though. Bye!" What am I even saying? I carry nothing with me. More
importantly though, why is nobody responding?

Third time is the charm. The workshop is probably where I will find
some help. The mechanics are good at solving problems and tend to have
situational awareness. They will offer me the hints I need to press on
with my quest. One of them is working with a battery, while another
checks an exhaust pipe. "This is a fine piece of machinery you got
there mate. I remember how exhilarating it was to drive my motorcycle
to distant lands." Engineers require focus to do their work properly.
I am aware that interrupting them is not nice. Probably not
acknowledging me is their way of communicating how busy they are. "Was
on my way out. Take care!"

Having not found any answers, I am left where I started. What I have
learnt in the meantime is that the people here do not interact with
me. I can come up with several reasonable explanations, though none
matters. The point is that whatever I do, I have to do it alone,
hoping that one of my attempts will produce a different result than
what I have been getting. It is all trial and error. Sometimes we
withdraw from the world only to find out the world withdrew from us.
