---
title: "Comment on whether I have ASD"
excerpt: "A review about whether I am autistic."
---

What follows is an excerpt from an email exchange where I talk about
myself in relation to Autism Spectrum Disorder.  The discussion was
about autism and whether I might also be autistic.  I have never been
formally checked/diagnosed as such.  The block quote below (indented
text) is shared with permission, while the identity of my correspondent
remains private.

* * *

> I discovered it after stumping by chance to a video about autism for women
>
> Behind the Mask: Autism for Women and Girls | Kate Kahle | TEDxAustinCollege
> <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tbes1mm2VgM>

Good to know!  I just watched the video.  Based on it and other things I
read, I have gathered the following notes:

- Autism is indeed as you suggest: either you have it or you don't.

- There is a great deal of variety among autistic people.  Meaning that
  what applies to one, may not hold true for another (at least not to
  the same degree).

- The science behind it still has ways to go and there are deep-seated
  biases that remain to be overcome.  Perhaps we will discover that
  things are even more nuanced/complex.

- I would expect neurotypical folks to not be 'typical' within the
  confines of their own categorisation: they should exhibit considerable
  variety as well.

A quick review of my case:

- I am very good at "masking" and that was my default mode of conduct in
  ages past.  It led me to a period of depression.  The length does not
  matter right now.  I managed to address it by changing my attitude: no
  more masking and apologising for who I am---I am just honest and don't
  care what people think about me (whether they like me or not, consider
  me a weirdo, etc.).

  The apparent cost of that change in attitude is that I quit my career
  and changed my beliefs/social-expectations from the root to the
  branches.  I became a different person in terms of aspirations,
  outlook, attainment of "social points" (e.g. a respectable degree, a
  successful career).  Old me died a long time ago.  No exaggerations!

  I used to work at the European Parliament (my university studies were
  on EU-related issues; everything else is self-taught, normally through
  trial and error (i.e. tinkering) instead of some formal training).
  Now my jobs are whatever sort of part-time manual labour comes my way,
  which means "unemployment" or "partial employment".  The good thing is
  that I do not need to socialise with people to get things done.  The
  bad thing is that they do not pay well and require a lot of energy;
  energy which I would rather direct towards my intellectual pursuits,
  Emacs packages, etc.

  About me being honest, it helps that I am a philosopher.  People have
  this stereotypical notion that philosophers are irregular fellows,
  which helps my case as I don't need to tell them more.  As soon as
  they realise I am philosophising, they have the "oh, you REALLY are
  weird" kind of epiphany (without ever saying it, though it is obvious
  and funny).

- I do not pursue friendships: never call anyone, never message them,
  and so on.  For many years now I live in a remote village in a
  mountainous area and have no social circle as part of my day-to-day
  life (a friend might visit my area once in a blue moon or I might have
  tea with a neighbour, but still no need for social activities).  For
  example, when I was in Brussels, I had two people I would usually go
  out with: they would contact me once every few months and be like
  "Hey, did you disappear again?  Let's go for a drink!".  If they would
  not message me, I would just stay alone without ever realising that
  several weeks had gone by...  My sense of time and direction is
  excellent, though not when it comes to interpersonal relations and the
  need to "keep in touch".

  I also have no social media presence.  To my mind this is a good thing
  personally and politically (won't elaborate on the politics here).  If
  someone wants to learn about me, they are welcome to ask me anything.
  No need to peruse a profile page.

- I have not had issues with motor skills.  For example, I played
  football in a semi-professional capacity (would have become a pro,
  were it not for a major injury), and I have done (and still do) lots
  of jobs that involve manual labour: motorcycle mechanic, stone mason,
  bartender, waiter, and the like.  I remain athletic.

- I can read other people really well by understanding the intent behind
  their actions and combining it with relevant information to predict
  their behaviour.  I know when someone is lying or has an ulterior
  motive (obviously this is not possible/easy for written exchanges).
  Though I do not empathise with them: I do not feel them emotionally,
  but I reason how they feel---I interpret them the way an AI would, if
  that makes sense.

- I have never had a romantic attachment to anyone.  Not even what we
  call a "crush".  Never!  (I understand it rationally, as noted above.)
  I have had a few cases where others were attracted to me, but I never
  felt infatuation or, generally, this notion that "you are my other
  half and I cannot live without you".  In this regard, I have no dreams
  of an "ideal partner", never idolised some celebrity, was never sad
  about being potentially rejected by someone, do not feel any need to
  be in a romantic relationship, and simply can't relate to people who
  obsess about these issues (by "can't relate", I mean that I consider
  it super-easy to not think about them and go on with my life).

  I should clarify here that I am not emotionless.  I do care about
  other people, such as my friends and family.  I do love my dog and
  care a lot about animals in general.  And so on.  I just can't relate
  to the obsession or this feeling of emptiness/fulfilment if you are
  alone/romantically-attached.

- I let my beard grow for health reasons.  In order to keep a clean
  shave, I need to apply a razor twice-a-day: this results in my skin
  being irritated (dry skin and razor burns) and I would rather avoid
  all those chemicals.  The beard is healthier for the skin and
  considerably easier to maintain---I just wash it daily as part of my
  cold shower, though I was told that some people use all sorts of
  products on their beards (I have no need for any of that).

  What I also discovered about having a beard, and why I want to keep it
  even if I can somehow keep a clean shave and retain skin health, is
  that people no longer try to get close to me for the friendly hug,
  kiss on the cheek, or cross-kisses in the air around the cheeks.  I
  believe you know what I am referring to.  In France, they salute you
  by kissing you once, in Belgium twice or thrice, in Greece twice, and
  so on (I am not sure about the number of kisses, but you get the
  idea).  I no longer need to proactively extend my hand for a handshake
  and implicitly warn "no kisses", as the beard does that automatically.
  Yay!

- I am not a control freak and do not obsess about particular interests.
  If I am alone, I will think about some philosophical theme or work on
  my hobbies (e.g. Emacs), but I will not act as a nerd in a social
  context.  It probably helps that my friends are already carefully
  selected, so I don't have to unexpectedly talk about wildly random
  stuff (e.g. what was discussed during some gossip show on TV---I don't
  even have a television).

- I believe I am competent with eye contact.  What people would find
  unsettling about me is my seemingly inexhaustible capacity for
  listening.  I have been with people who can go on talking for 30
  minutes straight and who will interrupt you as soon as you utter a
  word (many folks in politics are like that).  I would never interrupt
  them and would then recall what they talked about and be able to make
  accurate remarks on what they shared.  Put differently, I am a good
  listener and am very patient.

  Being a good listener sounds like a wonderful quality, though it is
  not always desirable.  For example, in the world of politics you have
  to be assertive, appear unequivocal in your statements, leave no room
  for doubt, and the like.  In most cases, I consider those signs of
  either dogmatism or foolishness (similar, but not identical) and would
  not play that game.  As such, I might appear "weak" when, in truth, I
  am confident in my abilities: I do not see the point of pretending to
  be certain about my opinions---the "I would die for my beliefs" sounds
  ridiculous to me, because you imply that you will die for something
  that might be a falsehood (put differently: "are you sure your beliefs
  are true?").

This covers it for now.  I may have missed something, though this should
give you a good idea.
