---
title: "Scouts and acceptance"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal where I write about the 'boring' life in the countryside."
---

The following is an entry from my journal.

* * *

This is the first warm night of the summer. It is still humid. Water
is dripping outside from the roof. There no longer is this familiar
cool air of the evening hours, which gets progressively cooler
throughout the night. Like all other animals around me, I am adapting
to the evolving circumstances. Things tend to be quiet when the sun is
high in the sky. The birds seek refuge under the trees and the frogs
are probably spending most of their time underwater. Everything comes
to life as the sun moves to its setting phase. These days I only
encounter eagles either very early in the morning or at dusk. The
crows and magpies that would even come up to my doorstep are nowhere
to be seen. They must have migrated further up the mountain in search
of lower temperatures.

In terms of human activity, it is largely uneventful here. Well, I
guess I do produce enough noise with all the manual labour I do, but
it is quiet otherwise. People who know my situation ask how do I
manage to deal with this state of affairs. Perhaps I have developed
some skill without actively trying to master it, though all I can tell
is that I do not feel unsettled. I mind my business and the days go by
peacefully. I could not have asked for more. Some will consider this
quietude, though there is plenty of activity all around: it is just
that one needs to be attuned to it by accepting it.

This morning a luxurious car stopped by the hut. I was doing some work
with the pickaxe while the dogs where sitting under the shade. A
stylish man walked out to ask me if I could keep the dogs indoors for
about an hour. He said: "we have a group of scouts approaching your
location on foot and some are afraid of dogs." I happily obliged.
There is no need to trigger anybody's phobia. The car went back whence
it came and about thirty minutes later some young adults started
showing up. I could hear them coming from further up the valley, as
they were playing loud music. As they walked by, I noticed they were
all holding a phone in hand and were focused on their screen. Did they
even notice any details around them? I could not tell. Perhaps they
were communicating with some dear friend or their mother, but I will
assume this was just a distraction of theirs. Friends and family can
wait, while you take the opportunity to give your undivided attention
to your surroundings.

The scouts moved slowly towards the other side of the valley, making
stops along the way. Hiking in these parts is not your average walk in
the park, after all. They were out of sight after a while, though they
could still be heard. This event reminded me of the notion of "so
close; yet so far". We can be in the physical proximity of some thing,
place, or person, yet our mind does not appreciate what is. For the
scouts, this excursion could have been done virtually, such as inside
of a gym: put them on a treadmill, keep the speed low to facilitate
phone usage, and blast those speakers. They were not mentally prepared
to change their ways and so they would have found this place
incredibly dull.

I not only tolerate life in my mountains, I actively enjoy it. It took
me a while to adjust to the natural rhythms and to let everything
transpire at its own pace. Now I have an eye for the little things,
like how my surroundings are evolving with the changing seasons. I am
environed by peace, while I have the capacity to recognise it and not
seek more.

People ask me how can I be so nonchalant. "Do you not get bored?" is a
common question. Part of it has to do with my appreciation of nuances.
I am a product of my environment. When you internalise the notion that
things happen when they are meant to, you no longer get upset when
whatever plans did not get realised at some arbitrary deadline. It is
a laissez faire way of living, where you do what you can with the
understanding that most phenomena are not a function of your volition.
It also is a way of discovering what you want by letting the flow of
life make it manifest rather than you developing expectations for
matters you do not control.

Knowing what we want is among the most difficult achievements. This
might seem like an exaggeration: "of course I know what I want; who
are you to know better than me!?", you may exclaim. What I mean is not
that we have no awareness of our conscious desires, but rather that we
have not necessarily thought them through to appreciate their reason
and whether they are consistent with our present state. Many of our
wants are a reflection of what others in our milieu take for granted
or what we have been conditioned to seek through force of habit. We
echo a common sentiment, a known magnitude that is, perhaps, not
aligned anymore with our actuality.

What I have known for a long time now is how biased we can be in
favour of the familiar. The unfamiliar may be unfulfilling and leave a
bad first impression on us, such as in the case of the slower pace of
life in the mountains that the scouts needed to make tolerable by
means of loud music and always-on Internet connectivity. There are
good reasons for preferring the known: I do it as well. Though if we
do not try to keep an open mind towards new experiences when those
happen, then we can become stagnant and not well-rounded in our
outlook.

The key is to allow events to unfold and to accept them for what they
are. "I will fix it" is a common sentiment which hints at our
propensity to overreach rather than to adapt to what is present.
Sometimes we can indeed make changes that are benign to us, though we
can also "fix it" by changing our perspective rather than trying to
affect the relevant factors.

To the question of me getting bored, I can tell that it is indeed
difficult if you expect spectacles and the kind of social events one
finds in the city. But why demand those at all times and not learn to
work with what you have once in the countryside? I find it
interesting, for example, to hike to the peak of the mountain where
the eagles are. Seeing such large birds up close is amazing! Or to
tend to the trees I have planted, which show signs of growth every
day. These sort of activities are boring only if we are expecting
something else altogether. Otherwise they are fine and we can find
fulfilment in them. There is nothing to be fixed about them: we just
have to reconsider our approach. Conversely, I will not complain that
city life is not like what I find in my valley, and will instead
appreciate what it has to offer.

There are individual preferences and it is okay to be opinionated
about what works for each of us. Though we can learn to be more
adaptable and curious. It is a matter of trying to broaden our mind in
a controlled way to that which is different. Then we will appreciate
whatever is for what it is and, perhaps, become more aware of things
we would otherwise take for granted. What to do with such knowledge
will depend on the specifics of the case. For some, it will let them
stick to their course of action while making the requisite
refinements; for others it may be the impetus they need to escape from
circumstances and habits that are detrimental to them.

While this is a warm night, it will still be cold in a couple of
hours. It is easy to get sick in the mountains by underestimating the
local climate. This too is something one can complain about, provided
they are not prepared to behave on the basis of acceptance. I will
keep the window slightly open to get fresh air. And I will fall asleep
while listening to the crickets and night birds.
