---
title: "When there is no way, you have to dig"
excerpt: "An excerpt from my journal where I comment on the hard work I do around my place and how it relates to my life in general."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *

It is early Autumn now. Average day temperatures in Cyprus still hover
above 25 degrees Celsius. The mountains are always cooler, especially
at night. Even during the peak Summer days, one needs extra clothing
post midnight. More so during the colder months. The drought continues
and with it the undoing of many of my plantations. I am powerless to
affect such magnitudes and thus accept my fate. Though "fate" is
three-fold: choice, chance, and inevitability. I control one third of
it and consistently choose to fight and to do things my way.

"He is a little bit anarchistic, no?" said a prospective employer to a
friend regarding the option of recruiting me. This I learnt years
later and was not surprised. The phrase is a euphemism for pointing
out that I cannot be tamed and will only conform with whatever
establishment if I want to. "Loose cannon" in other words.

When the world tells me that there is no alternative, that the
authorities have all the answers, and that any question is anathema to
the powers that be, I respond with determined industriousness to
become the counterpoint. I do not always succeed, sure. This is not
some self-help gimmick to win all arguments. It simply is the constant
in my behavioural patterns. Tell me to obey "just because" and you
might get a forceful challenge, if I care enough. It is how I got
Oreeon from the vet earlier than I was instructed to, for example, or
how I built the hut against the conventional wisdom against such
"madness".

Two years of living here, I know that every patch of land around me
incorporates hours of my labour. I have been injured many times over
to make things happen. I continue to do so with grit as I witness the
progress I am making every week. The place is fairly safe from floods
and wildfires. It is becoming more comfortable in general. Though no
comfort can ever change the disposition I have to live under a rock,
if I must, and to steel myself for another long day of hard work.
Comforts are for my dogs and whoever else might live here.

My bane and blessing is that I am a lone wolf. I do not ask anyone for
validation and do not seek advice on where to head next in life. If
somebody says something reasonable, I do listen and will change my
mind in the face of cogent arguments. For example, I did revise my
plan for the materials I would use for the hut upon consultation with
relevant experts. My original idea was okay, but would not be as cheap
as I had hoped. I do not pretend to know everything and will not argue
for the sake of arguing. This is where education comes in and my
philosophical disposition shines. I just know what I want for my life
and then put in the effort to understand how to acquire and wield the
requisite means. My plans are flexible; my values solid.

Being a lone wolf is not something you cosplay at. Yes, I have met
posers who do exactly that. I guess it makes for a good show to not
have a single scratch on your body, to enjoy those silky smooth palms,
yet to assume the role of the rugged individual while living the
opulent life by some swimming pool. My experience is not something I
enjoy or celebrate. I just accept it without fanfare. Like the wolf in
the wilderness, I have to employ guile and vigour to cope with the
ever precarious environment I find myself in. The cost of failure is
prohibitive. The plan B, then, is for plan A to continue to work.
There is a "wow" factor to that, if you think this is a show. But when
it is the real thing, it is unnerving. Words cannot communicate that
which is visceral.

My blessing is that I have the skills to survive, especially the
mental fortitude of not relenting in the face of improbable odds. One
way or another, through highs and lows, I am still going from strength
to strength, now at the age of 37. I do not even feel I have ascended
to the peak of my abilities. I push the boundaries in everything I do
with ceaseless enthusiasm. My bane is that I live too close to the
danger zone where realistically no-one will come to my rescue or join
my pack in pursuit of normality.

The work I have been doing these days is on a piece of land that was
historically used as a dumping ground for leftovers of some
construction work. Large piles of broken concrete have over the
decades been intertwined with grapevines and roses. Digging through
this chunk of near impervious terrain is extremely taxing on the body.
Without experience on how to use the pickaxe, and absent the
combination of strength and stamina, I would be risking serious injury
(e.g. to pull a muscle in the back). But I have been doing this sort
of work for a while now. My body is conditioned to the rigours. I just
start and keep going until I need to quit.

Today I did four hours of digging plus two hours of moving the dirt
and rocks away from where they were. Clearing this spot provides the
impetus for the next project: to set up a grill and build a shed
around it in order to shelter me from any potential rainfall while I
am making food. I do not know when this will happen. I do what is
within my power and then wait for favourable circumstances to make my
next move.

I cannot tell if there is a way to go from my current state to a new
normal. In the past I tried to slow down, as it were, and suppress my
feral spirit. That ended up being the lowest point in my life; the
"darkness", as I call it. It is no viable option. Perhaps by digging I
am setting the conditions for a new state of affairs in which the wolf
remains such yet also finds his pack. Or I am just digging deeper into
the abyss where nobody will find me. Who knows? This is the best I can
do, anyway, so these are idle thoughts.

As I am typing this, I feel minor discomfort in parts of my palm's
skin. It is due to all this business. It reminds me of the only truth
I have ever believed with every fibre of my being: the pain of doing
things in earnest. The discomfort will go away in a few hours. I did
what I had to do and am content with the results. It is tiresome yet
invigorating, for I am galvanised to continue.
