---
title: "Re: How do you walk four dogs?"
excerpt: "I explain how I train my dogs to be good canine citizens and the lessons for life that go with this."
---

I get asked the titular question every time I pass with my dogs
through the streets of the nearby village. Ever since I started
walking the puppies, I try to frequent the built up areas to expose
the young ones to people, noises, smells, and visuals that are not
familiar to them.

Dogs need to be socialised to overcome their natural hesitation
towards strangers and boisterous places. Otherwise they are fearful,
stressful, and aggressive whenever they do not feel comfortable. In
effect, socialising dogs is how you empower them to be more confident
in their abilities and to better discern the likely dangerous
situations: those which truly are irregular.

Walking four dogs is no mean feat. If you do not know what you are
doing, you are in for a frustrating experience. Each animal will pull
in a different direction, throwing you off balance and testing your
patience. There is a good chance you will injure yourself, such as by
getting a dislocated shoulder from one of those sudden pulls. Dogs do
not just "want to please their human" nor are they "human's best
friend" by default. These are cute words we use when we are not
prepared to discuss the power dynamics in a human-canine relationship.
Dogs respond well to authority and, conversely, will do what they
think is best where there is a power vacuum.

If your dog is not listening to you and if it is making a mess out of
everything, the fault is yours for (i) not gaining its trust, (ii) not
earning its respect, and (iii) not showing it what you expect. The
authority I allude to pertains to drawing boundaries and of setting
your dogs up for success. The requisite leadership is based on clear
communication, consistency, and patience.

When you get a puppy, for example, you want to condition it to your
touch: gently grab it by the tail, hold its paws, open its mouth, pick
it up slowly and put it back down with care. In short, let it know
that you are not hurting it and that you are in complete control of
the situation. If you yourself are uncertain, stressed, and are
fumbling around, the dog will notice and will correctly consider you
unreliable.

Understand energy levels. When they are high, the animals need an
outlet for their exuberance. Let them expend that built-up ferocity
through playful behaviour and then, once they have calmed down, engage
with them in a more structured way. A moderately tired dog is more
focused on its interactions with you and, thus, learns better.

"Do you train dogs?" one lady asked me the other day. I replied
affirmatively, while explaining that I am only interested in making
them good canine citizens rather than preparing for the show ring. She
then went on to say "I want you to tell me how to teach my dog to sit
calmly at the couch and to not bark". I explained that there is no
such training. Or, to be more precise, peaceful behaviour is what you
get after the dog has gone for a walk, spent enough quality time with
you, and had its meal. Whether the dog barks or not will depend on the
kind of breed it is and the situations it encounters. Some dogs
("watchdogs") are meant to bark when they notice something irregular,
effectively working like an alarm mechanism.

Before you even walk the dog, you must have already established
yourself as the leader through consistency and clear communication.
This is also true if you are introducing new dogs to the pack, like I
did with my two puppies recently. Otherwise, you are not in control of
the situation and you will not have a happy outcome.

Consistency is key to the conditioning you will be doing. This is not
formal training, but the totality of actions you perform while sending
a message to your dog. For example, from day one my puppies learnt the
way that leads outside, where they are supposed to pee and poo.
Similarly, as soon as I would notice that they wanted food, I would
always bring it from the same spot, leave it at the same place, and
repeat the familiar sound (namely "food" in Greek). Within a few days,
the puppies would tell me what they were in need of by choosing the
direction they wanted to go to. They even scratch on the door, thus
asking me to open it. The same principle applies to every single
interaction with the dog. Be consistent with your body language and
fully confident in how you handle the situation. If you are
unequivocal and precise, the dog understands you know what you are
doing and follows along. Else, it will rely on its own devices and you
will not like the results.

Coming to the point of actually walking the dogs, this is the
continuation of the aforementioned. You get them used to walking on a
leash by (i) not making a big deal out of it, (ii) not showing signs
of frustration or impatience while dealing with the dogs natural
reluctance to be on leash and (iii) leading them to walk by your side
by guiding them gently yet decisively. The dog does not go wherever it
wants: you are setting the direction as well as the pace. But you are
not dragging it along either. You are both on the road as a team. As
such, you let the animal sniff around, do wait for it, and go to the
other side of the street if it feels more comfortable there (or is
just curious to check things out). While walking, make the dog stay
next to you and get accustomed to your pace. Do not have it run in
front of you, as then it gets confused about who the leader is plus
you will not be able to control it.

Remember that dogs respond to body language, which you disseminate at
much greater volume than verbal cues. If you master that, you will be
able to walk as many dogs as you can endure. No matter the training,
you still need to have good balance, be quick on your feet, and
sufficiently strong in your upper body. More so if the dogs are large.

Dogs ultimately follow your lead because they like you and you are
actually taking them somewhere in life. The more you deepen your trust
with your dog, the easier it will be for them to cooperate with you,
as they will know you have everybody's wellness in mind.
