---
title: "Re: how do you do food?"
excerpt: "Excerpt from a private exchange in which I explain my approach to food and daily routines."
---

The following is an excerpt from a private exchange. I am sharing it
with the express permission of my correspondent, without disclosing
their identity. The quoted/indented parts belong to my correspondent.

* * *

> It just randomly occured to me to ask you how do you food? Because
> I'm guessing food is also a facet of life that you have simplified.
> Not necessarily a list of what foods you eat day to day, more like
> the logistical/pragmatic aspects of it and any other thoughts you
> have about food as a topic. A few questions are do you meal prep, do
> you basically eat the same food 80% of the time and if yes, do you
> cover any micronutrient shortfalls with multivitamins etc. I do all
> the above.

Yes, I have thought about food and have my opinions about it. The
short version of what I do is keep things simple and moderate.
Simplicity applies to the work required to prepare a meal and also to
the flavours involved. Moderation means to not overdo certain tastes
and instead work towards that which occurs naturally in the dish.

A good example of these principles is the Greek-style (or
"Mediterranean") salad: it is easy to make yet also gets the job done
in terms of its nutritional value. It consists of common vegetables,
like cucumbers, tomatoes, onions, peppers, lettuce, and olives,
together with some herbs like oregano and basil, plus a little bit of
olive oil and vinegar. I need maybe five minutes to prepare it and do
not have to do a lot of work afterwards to clean the place up. Another
good example, if I am having meat, is roasted pork chops. They take
more time to prepare but the process is very simple: just flip them
every few minutes to avoid charring one side. I serve them straight
without any sauce or extras.

Bad examples, and thus types of dish I do not consume, are those which
(i) involve lots of preparatory steps and (ii) mix together different
classes of taste, like milky and oily. The "mousaka" recipe that is
part of my local cuisine is a huge problem in this regard. Its
complexity is burdensome in terms of the work necessary to produce the
meal, of the follow-up efforts to clean up all the tools/spaces, and
of the extra processing the body needs to do to break down these
overdone/heavy flavours. You know it is terrible because you feel
dizzy after eating it. Because I do not want to be a slave of my
kitchen and to burden my body with needless complexity, I avoid any
meal that blends different classes of taste like that.

The rule of thumb is this: if it is not simple, it is probably not
right. There are exceptions, hence the "rule of thumb".

Simplicity and moderation extend to the cooking techniques I apply. In
short, I do not use a frying pan. Anything that is fried will deviate
substantially from its natural flavour. Compare, for example, a raw
onion to a fried one. The latter is caramelised and, on top, delivers
a combination of contrasting classes of taste, namely, sweet and oily.
Same idea for marinated ingredients: they are not for me.

Keeping things close to their natural state means that I never cook
vegetables (e.g. to make a soup), unless they can only be consumed
that way. If some vegetable needs to be cooked (usually legumes), then
I will boil it to the minimum viable level. I will not overcook it
because then it gets too sweet or is anyhow not the same thing
anymore.

By the same token, I never do smoothies or juices. I eat the raw
ingredient directly. The reason is two-fold: (i) I want my jaws to
continue to work hard the way they were meant to and (ii) I thus avoid
overconsuming certain foods. Think, for instance, about the carrot. It
is hard to chew on it so you will practically not consume more than
one raw carrot. But if you turn it into some barely recognisable
blended version of itself, you can take in the equivalent of several
carrots without even realising it. In other words, you do not have a
natural brake and are thus overdoing it. Juices are exactly the same,
especially once you remove the flesh of the fruit and keep its
liquids. Instead, peel off the orange and eat it outright. Let your
body work with the limits it finds in foods.

I mentioned soups earlier: I would never make one myself but will
accept it if I am invited for dinner. The reason I do not like them is
because there is always a more natural and easier alternative.
Vegetable soup? Do a salad instead. Fish soup? Grill the fish and
serve it with some lemon.

I do not eat dairy products. Not because of a principled objection to
them, but because their mass production goes together with the
debasement of their quality. So-called "Greek yogurt" is not sour
anymore, for example. Same idea for Feta, which typically is a toned
down cow-milk-like mockery of the real thing. Milk I never fancied and
cheese is hit-or-miss in terms of flavour and usually unhealthy in how
much processing goes into it.

I also avoid all bread and bread-like products. The only exception is
the sourdough bread I make at home. This one I can trust not to have
any additives, including common ingredients like sugar, salt, eggs,
and milk. Check out the label on an industrial loaf of bread to find
all sorts of strange substances there: it is becoming increasingly
indistinguishable from garbage.

As you can imagine, I do not consume any sweets or salted foods---and
I am strict about it. I have not eaten ice cream in over a decade, for
example. No salted peanuts or other similarly served dry nuts. Same
for sodas and all heavily processed meals, most of which I quit
consuming circa 2006.

I have never taken supplements in my life and always strive to have
decent variety in my meals. I have also not been on any kind of
medication and have rarely visited doctors. Not to imply anything
here: it just is how things have worked out, in large part due to
financial constraints (doctors cost a lot, so the conditions force me
to be healthier and simpler). This has worked nicely for me over the
decades, but I cannot know how much is down to my constitution and my
habits or even the environment I am in. I always have energy for work,
for long walks, and other activities such as intellectual pursuits. My
consistency is my greatest asset and my resulting availability to do
stuff is my best ability. For example, last time I had flu-like
symptoms was in my early teenage years.

Finally, I have long now quit alcohol consumption, while I never did
any other substance abuse. I never smoked a cigarette, for instance,
even though virtually all of my friends were smokers. I consider it a
bad sign when I need some boost to do my work, like caffeine. It means
that something is not right and I resort to a short-term solution that
will most probably develop into a long-term problem. I have been
athletic throughout my life and consider it essential to remain at the
peak of my powers for as long as possible through disciplined daily
routines.

For me, the key is to keep things bland and not seek excitements in
food. Otherwise, you will continue to pursue the intense flavours
which inevitably lead to complex recipes, overdone techniques, absence
of natural brakes, and thus abusive consumption. This applies to life
in general, but let's keep it to food for now.

> Do you eat eggs? That's the only thing I use a frying pan for
> because I found it difficult/unsustainable to eat 4 boiled eggs
> daily (not about the taste; more like the digestive load it
> generates) so I have to consume it in omelette form which I find is
> a lot easier to digest.

To me, the omelette falls in the same category as the example I gave
with the carrots. It is very easy to consume large amounts of egg in
this way. One boiled egg every other day is fine, unless you are doing
some really intense physical work or have such a need, in which case
one or two a day sounds okay.

Taking a step back, I notice how the search for variety effectively
regulates overconsumption. If, for example, I had an egg one day, then
I do not need to also eat meat or tuna. Those are for the days after.
If I had legumes one day, then the next day can be something else.

> 1 What percentage of your food is meal prepped ahead of time and
> what percentage is prepared and eaten on the same day?

I prepare the meal and eat it right away. I only do enough for one
time. It is easier because I do not need to be concerned about its
storage and preservation. This is especially important during the
summer, as it gets really hot here and so it is riskier to keep food
around for longer.

> 2 Do you track your calories and macros? If yes, what's your daily
> protein intake?

No, I do not track anything. I have a lay person's understanding of
what the different kinds of food give you and so I take a little bit
of everything. This is the variety I mentioned.

I do not track any data about my life. For example, I do not measure
how many steps I took on a given walk or exactly how many glasses of
water I drunk. If I walk enough to feel tired, then I am good. If I
drink enough water to feel hydrated, then everything is okay. If I
have the vitality to keep pursuing my interests and doing all the
tasks I want, then everything is in order.

Not tracking data saves me from the pitfalls of overthinking but also
of the deception that is overoptimisation. When we try to optimise too
much, we think we operate on a fully understood system, when in
reality there are lacunae in our knowledge. I thus choose to remain
generic in doing the simple things simply, which effectively means
that on the topic of overoptimisation I err on the side of caution.

> 3 What is your main form of exercise? Low intensity cardio (I saw
> some titles in your YouTube of you going on long walks) or do you
> also do strength training?
>
> I do calisthenics at home because that is the simpler option. No gym
> commute/money/clothes/logistics.

I hike a lot. These mountains are quite steep and I go up and down
multiple times a day. Then there is all the physical work I do in and
around the hut. It involves the hammer, the sledgehammer, the pickaxe,
and power tools, all of which demand strength and endurance. Those
tools are hard to wield for long, but also the impact they have on
whatever you are working on adds to the difficulty of the task. Then
there is the duration, which tests your strength over time. For
example, one of the most physically demanding forms of farming is to
work the land with the pickaxe, which is what I do. Try it for 5
minutes to get a feel for how challenging it is. Then do it for 2
hours under direct sunlight... Oftentimes the work I do for the hut
demands that I lift heavy burdens, like the balcony door I installed
recently. Those are challenging as well.

If I do not do any physical work, then I will do calisthenics and
stretching. Again, variety is the way to avoid exaggerations.

When I was playing football, I did go to the gym for a little while,
but ultimately did not like it. There is something about the highly
controlled closed space that does not inspire me to be active. With
football, you train on the pitch (we would play on dirt and gravel
most of the time) so you get exposed to the weather: it is more rugged
and feels authentic as a result. Same for my life in the mountains,
which awakens in me the wild animal that thrives in open spaces and in
the sense of danger+adventure. Saving money is a bonus, of course.
