---
title: "Freedom within robust constraints"
excerpt: "A journal entry in which I explain how I approach leadership and the management of my affairs."
---

This is an entry from my journal.

* * *

The past ~2 months I have not written as many journal entries as
usual. The time I would normally dedicate to journaling has been taken
up by my two new puppies, Meelon and Oreeon. They are almost three
months old now. At this age, they require a lot of attention. Their
energy levels are high, as is their curiosity. Yet they lack the
experience to do the right thing in most situations. It is why I must
be around to guide them accordingly.

My style of upbringing is best described as "freedom within robust
constraints" or "intervention as the last resort". I let the puppies
experiment with the world, including the option to learn about their
limits the hard way. For example, Atlas is the top dog here: if they
annoy him he will growl and bark back at them, but will otherwise be
friendly towards them. I shall only intervene if there is danger,
which has not happened yet. If it does happen though, I will be
forceful and decisive.

Same principle for what happened last night. My goal was to
incentivise the puppies to follow me in the dark a few metres away
from the house. They were reluctant at first, until they figured the
low-light environment is still the same place they already know and
traverse each day. It took them a few minutes of hesitation until they
found the courage to follow in my footsteps. This was their "aha!"
moment, of realising they have the capacity to just walk around during
the night. I was patient the whole time and at no point did I force
things to happen. Had they not followed me, I would simply return home
with the intent of retrying some other time. This is the "freedom"
part of my method. The "robust constraints" is what they do not see,
which is the fact that I have accounted for the safety of the place
beforehand: I was only exposing them to a spot which I know is clear
of vegetation, thus minimising the risks.

I am their guardian and have the requisite situational awareness. I
set up for success and then remain in the background. Central to my
leadership is the view that nobody is expendable. Actions are guided
by foresight, such that threats are known and exposure to danger is
kept at a minimum. This is about understanding the prevailing
conditions and taking thoughtful decisions. The opposite is
recklessness and its underlying irresponsibility. A common example
with dogs is how they guard their food. The human must understand the
inter-canine dynamics. If I make the mistake of giving Atlas' meal to
the puppies, for example, then I am effectively asking Atlas to attack
the small dogs, thus creating a major source of danger and unrest.
This an entirely avoidable situation, when we act with foresight.

My role is not to teach the puppies outright, but to frame the
learning which occurs naturally through experimentation. I have done
the framework and let them operate therein. This is how I have
understood life in general and my life in particular as a process of
discovering what is latent in each form of life, without violating
reasonable limits.

What applies to dogs holds true for humans as well. We too need
leadership, in the form of understated and prescient guidance; of
structures that increase the likelihood of our initiatives being
benign and sustainable. In the absence of constraints, our capacity
for action can become self-destructive and unreliable, for we have no
warning signs of when to stop and thus of when we are operating at the
margin of the untenable extreme.

In essence, boundaries are those snippets of knowledge that tell us
something about the given state of affairs which allows us to estimate
where the viable space is. We can think of it like my house, with its
surrounding nature, at night: the puppies going beyond what they can
see entails greater risk for them, given their inexperience, so the
horizon of light delimits their boundary of the expected and the
controllable. Knowledge has the same effect of delineating a notional
space. Whatever possible deeds are then subject to a risk assessment.

In this regard, "imposing boundaries" is not about being
authoritarian. To point out where the limits are does not require
force. It can be done gently through instruction. I think of the
resort to coercion as a sign of failure to act with foresight: it is a
last-ditch attempt at salvaging the situation. If, in the case of my
young dogs, I need to use force to protect them, then it means that I
have already done mistakes in not anticipating the trouble: I was not
thoughtful enough to account for the possible risks and to factor in
all the data points pertinent to my resources. I thus expect that the
person who relies on violence to manage their affairs and get a point
across is one who lacks the wherewithal to commit to the long-term
method of careful guidance through foresight.

A person will find out what their potential is through a continuous
process of experimentation. Not to become the replica of another, but
to produce an outcome that is at one level recognisable as a pattern
in the given milieu and at another level remains specific to the case
at hand. My knowledge of training dogs, for example, is not based on
the experience of all possible dogs. I have simply discerned patterns
in some dogs (and not only), which allow me to foresee the scenaria
that might unfold. All I have is a starting point. The end result
remains open-ended, for I cannot know the particularities of events
that cumulatively form the dog in tandem with their own capacities and
the feedback loops those engender.

The starting point is the given, as are the abstract features of some
of the cases to be constituted. The specifics remain to be determined.
When it comes to our lives, to how we organise our social experience,
and how we estimate worthiness, we place too much importance on
prefigured outcomes rather than appreciate the subtleties of the
unexpected, the unfamiliar, and, perhaps, the unpopular or
unconventional. Social expectations are a factor, where we try to
guess what others will like and only try to deliver as much. Though we
also do it to ourselves, through force of habit. Think back to each
time you refused to try something new or even slightly different than
what you are used to. Is it because you know the outcome is genuinely
detrimental to your being? Or you have effectively developed tunnel
vision by only seeing one result as benign and desirable?

Freedom within robust constraints means that we have a starting point,
a general idea of what we wish to achieve, a comprehensive
appreciation of the risks and of the sustainable pathways, and an
understanding of the possible ways to go from what we have to what we
want. The details will take shape through the process as it unfolds.
Such is how I conduct myself and manage my affairs, with care and with
a gentle touch that nevertheless retains the option of exerting force
as a matter of last resort.
