---
title: "The blood moon and my place in the world"
excerpt: "I experienced the lunar eclipse and was inspired to write again about my spiritual outlook."
---

This is an excerpt from my journal.

* * *

It is past midnight now. I got home from a long walk in the mountains.
I do hike every evening or night with my dogs. When there is a full
moon I also go for another round afterwards to enjoy the experience.
There is something uncommon about walking under the moonlight. You can
see more figures around you, yet it is still dark enough to keep you
on high alert. Perhaps what I enjoy the most is to operate in this
liminal space between tranquillity and the sense of fear humans
naturally have for the indiscernible and, thus, the unpredictable.
While in the mountains at night, you understand better that you are
not in full control of the environment, yet to be there you must
operate with full confidence in your abilities to cope with the
challenges.

Living in the countryside outside a built up area requires situational
awareness at all times. You cannot afford to not know what is
happening around you, what your options are, and which are the ways
you might act in the face of danger. When the wildfires were raging,
for example, I knew which paths to take to flee to safety and to not
run into other troubles. I also scouted the area to update my
knowledge of the terrain. Similarly, I am prepared for floods: I pay
attention to qualities such as the composition of the terrain and how
muddy it gets after a regular rainfall. I also know where in those
slopes water flows may form. It is how I can anticipate which paths
are dangerous and which ones are more reliable.

Walking at night in the wilderness requires this level of alertness.
You have to be calm and composed, peaceful within, else you are
already starting from a position of disturbance, from a place where
you are feeling constant distractions. Calmness of this sort does not
lend itself to reveries and absentmindedness. It is of another kind
altogether. You are poised to act. Perhaps it is like the disposition
of the wolf while on the prowl. We are apex predators, after all,
although acculturation can trick us into thinking that we have fully
pacified and domesticated ourselves.

While atop the nearest peak, I bore witness to the lunar eclipse. It
lasted several hours. There was a phase to it where the moon was fully
covered by the earth's shadow. Its surface then acquired a red shade.
The colour was much more saturated than the warm yet subtle tints we
observe when the moon is on line of the horizon. In the final phase of
the eclipse, the reds gave way to desaturated yellows that faded into
white. As the moon started to brighten again, it shone with an intense
glow of light coming from its bottom left side. Within an hour or so,
the familiar face of the full moon was on display. I then left the
summit with a smile on my face, pondering the beauty of this world and
the humility required to appreciate the little things.

I cannot fathom the extent of the cosmos. What I am aware of is its
immanent orderliness. There is structure and pattern in phenomena
making manifest underlying processes of reasonableness and of
computation which themselves have order. It is orderly throughout.
Even what we conventionally consider chaotic is not devoid of pattern.
Nothing is. Not even when the cycle of transfiguration culminates in
the disintegration of a form, its reintegration in the greater whole
of fluctuating states, and ultimately its reconstitution into a more
stable form.

There is no point in boasting of one's putative greatness in the face
of the cosmos. How can I think I am the smartest being around when
there is reason in the very fabric of the world? This is intelligence
that spans the most minuscule of objects all the way to the totality
of life. What is my strength compared to the sheer forces that
engender the blood moon, that make this earth what it is, and that
have contributed to my making which will inevitably be followed by my
undoing? Whatever I have is derivative, partial, and contingent. And
whatever I invent is latent in the constitution of my immediate
milieu, waiting to be discovered.

You are humble when you are aware of the magnitudes. Otherwise, you
consider yourself the "real deal". There are levels to this. When you
are involved in sport, you know not to talk big because you have not
broken any records yet nor have reached the pinnacle of athletic
achievement. When you do science, you do not say much owning to the
understanding that your knowledge is limited. This is circumstantial
humility, as it depends on the interplay of factors that constitute
the case. The sportsperson, the scientist, and every other expert can
still be cocky in other ways.

People have a propensity to compare themselves to others. When we feel
content with ourselves, we make favourable comparisons that flatter
our status. When we loath who we are or have become, we seek to
confirm our foregone conclusion by pointing out the prominent
qualities in others. The mechanics of comparison work towards a new
equilibrium in which we find our place in the ranking among our peers.
It is not humility but powerlessness or cockiness, depending on the
specifics.

The ultimate humility necessarily is spiritual, else rooted in the
transcendent. It is the state of being we operate in when we submit to
the authority of something superordinate to our presence and when we
consider whatever good springs from it to be unassailable. Only when
the foundations of our mode of living are godly are we unshakably
humble. Everything else is precarious.

Names we use to describe the greater magnitudes are matters of
convention. A Greek man may honour the Olympic tradition out of
respect for the mythos that inspired his ancestors to pursue
excellence. Another may feel that a different set of narratives is
more appropriate. Fighting over symbols, metaphors, and artistic
representations is a distraction, as is the effort to affirm those as
true. We cannot hide from the gods. Our pretences are shallow, our
ambitions misguided. What matters is to live in accordance with the
world, which simply means to accept our place in the space, to outgrow
the need for drawing comparisons to others, and to stop kissing up
while punching down.

I am. It is not much. I feel empowered to tread the mountains alone
under the light of the red moon. It is not much. This body remains
fragile, no matter its tenacity. It is not much. I tend to my duties
with unflinching commitment. It is not much. I shall one day cease to
be. It is not much. Whatever happens, happens. I have long now
accepted the workings of the cosmos both when they seem to give and
when they appear to take. I go with the flow and cope with whatever
circumstances as they occur. To what end? I can come up with clever
justifications, but can never be certain. I thus choose to leave it
open and to keep my attention focused on the nuances. Not because
those are somehow more important. No, I cannot know as much. They just
remind me of my own presence in the grand scheme of things. Every
snapshot of the world is full of potential to keep us awestruck. Such
is the consistency between the micro and the macro views. It is only a
matter of recognising our surroundings.
