---
title: "Re: is ancient Sparta an influence on you?"
excerpt: "Excerpt from a private exchange in which I explain how ancient Greek values inform my way of life."
---

The following is an excerpt from a private exchange. I am sharing it
with permission without disclosing the identity of my correspondent.

* * *

> [...] is sparta and the mythology around their
> toughness/discipline/focus on "real things" an influence on you?
> That's the image I have of sparta from pop culture but you might
> have a different view because you are Greek

No, ancient Sparta per se does not inspire me. Though the ancient
Greek values, which the Spartans shared, do inform my way of life.

I think the pop culture view of the Spartans is exaggerated. Or, to be
more precise, the Spartans have a reputation that is not specific to
them. They were militaristic and austere, yes, though (i) austerity is
part of the Greek life in general throughout the aeons and (ii) all
Greeks had variations of the landowner-citizen-warrior
(ιδιοκτήτης-πολίτης-οπλίτης) theme.

With few exceptions, Greece was never a wealthy nation compared to its
peers. Not if we were to judge it against the rich and vastly more
populous areas of Egypt, Messopotamia, Persia, and, further east,
India and China. The Greeks have always been relatively few in number
and poor by comparison (the population dynamics are true even today).
The geography plays a big part in this.

Modern Greece is known for its beaches as a tourist attraction. This
it is, though if you think about it in terms of the ancient world, the
seaside does not give you any money. The soil is saturated with salt
and you cannot cultivate anything there. The winds are stronger than
in the hinterlands because there are no obstacles in their way.

Check out the small Aegean islands to get a sense of such a place:
those islands effectively are formations of rock surrounded by
undrinkable water. The only source of food and a modest income is
fishing---and it too is difficult due to strong winds during the
winter. The Greek mainland is rocky and full of steep mountains. It
does not lend itself to large-scale agriculture.

The Greeks thus had to rely on maritime trade, which led them to set
up small coastside colonies across the Mediterranean and the Black
sea. The Greek mainland was not an economic powerhouse or, if it was
for a while, that period was short.

The point is that austerity is inherent to the Greek way of life. The
word we have to describe our comfort with few things is "oligarky"
(ολιγάρκεια), which is not to be confused with "oligarchy"
(ολιγαρχία). Oligarky literally means "few+enough of" or "few+content
with". By contrast, oligarchy means "few+rule". Another variation of
this theme is "autarky" (αυτάρκεια) which means "self+enough of" or
"self+content with", which practically says that you live off of your
own produce. Again, this is not to be mistaken for "autarchy"
(αυταρχία) which stands for "self+rule".

At around the turn of the 21st century of the common era, the Greeks
lived through a period of unprecedented economic growth which was
fuelled by unsustainable capital flows brought about by the creation
of the European single currency (the Euro) and the concomitant
convergence of bond market interest rates. That fair-weather edifice
unravelled in the post-2008 financial crisis; a crisis whose chilling
effects the world still suffers from.

For the Greeks in particular, this came as a cultural shock because
people who were young adults at the time were raised with a Disney
princess view of the world in which you are entitled to everything and
in which there is a happy ending just because of who you are. The
middle finger they got from the markets has hopefully brought them
back to the primordial Greek reality of living within your means and
of working through hardship with vigour, creativity, and a good sense
of humour (humour is a powerful coping mechanism). In this world there
is no space for self-styled indignant protesters (elsewhere
"indignados" or the various "occupy" movements) who twiddle their
thumbs at the city square waiting for the authorities to give them the
princely life they were promised.

Anyway, not to run off on a political tangent... The gist is that the
ancient Spartans are not special in this regard.

Then we have the wider theme of toughness, an expression of which
occurs through militarism. This too is not an ancient Spartan
exclusivity. Just look at the Greek gods to get a sense of how every
single Greek colony thought of itself. The aesthetics of a people tell
you a lot about their underlying values. If they appreciate an
athletic body, it is because they necessarily respect and promote
discipline, commitment, and hard work, for there is no other way to
maintain that kind of body. Plus the obvious appreciation of sheer
strength.

If their greatest religious event is athletic at its core (the Olympic
games), it shows how they thought of spirituality as a facet of the
human condition that is rooted in the vigorous body. To them, the
spirit is not more important than the body and, conversely, they would
not treat the body as something to be feared or loathed or, indeed, to
be hidden from sight.

If their goddess of wisdom (Athena) is a warrior rather than some
pacifist academic figure, it is because they understand that sometimes
you have to stand your ground and be forceful. When "sometimes" is the
right course of action is what wisdom is all about. To put it
differently, wisdom consists in the judgement one applies to suspend
their own rules in order to avoid absurdity or annihilation.

Athena is a woman whose presence engenders awe: an unambiguous way to
communicate the ancient Greek value that strength, ferocity, and
perfect poise are not limited to manhood (same can be said about
Artemis, for example, and nobody would want to mess around with Hera,
anyway).

I can go on about the symbolism germane to all the gods, but the point
is this: the Greeks did not want to be seen as pitiful and to compete
with each other over who is the most victimised. This is a perversion
of the excellence they aspired to. It is a race to the bottom that is
celebrated as success and valorised as propriety.

It then follows that whatever you want in life you earn it the hard
way. There are no shortcuts. Not because you are entitled to it. No.
You get what your deeds yield---and what they can return depends on
the prevailing political conditions so, in other words, on what others
are and have been doing. Combine that with the austerity you are
raised in and you get a set of values that are at once communitarian
and individualistic.

The community is the milieu in which the landowner-citizen-warrior is
realised and the space where the religious experience is made whole.
It is the place where typically all your friends and relatives---your
clan---are. The individual is the person who seeks excellence, in
accordance with the Olympic ideals, and who nonetheless has to operate
with moderation to avoid hubris.

Hence the Apollonian cult of knowing your limits and of not being
reckless (and Apollon was the patron of Sparta, by the way), embedded
in the three Delphic maxims of "μηδέν άγαν" ("nothing in excess" or
"nothing in deviation" [of the middle way], so avoid exaggerations),
"γνώθι σεαυτόν" ("know yourself", so that you can be mindful of your
limits, which nonetheless requires that you investigate your world),
"εγγύα παρά δ'Άτα" ("assurances stand beside Ate (the goddess of
ruin)", so do not be full of yourself and reckless in what you do and
thus, again, work within your means).

There is an element of honour that connects the communitarian with the
individualistic. It is at the root of interpersonal relations. People
are expected to recognise excellence, to value family and friendship,
and generally to not disturb the boundaries between the house and the
city. We have a word which I will expound on in some future philosophy
video called "φιλότιμο". I would render it in English as _philotimy_
or _philotimia_. It literally means to be a friend of honour, kind of
how philosophy is friendship of wisdom. (And "friend" in this context
is a form of love, but "love" proper is called "αγάπη" (agape).) In
short, honour is what inspires a person to be honest, to not seek to
cheat, to not be a swindler, to respect someone's household, to not
violate anybody's sacred sites, and the like.

Those who lack honour have their reputation tarnished for an eternity.
In closely knit societies this is a powerful mechanism to enforce the
norms because those who are punished cannot make a living anymore. The
Greeks care about their reputation so much that we have a word for it:
υστεροφημία, which means one's fame after they die. Let me call this
_hysterophemy_. One tends to their hysterophemy when they pursue
excellence, because if you are going to do something well, you might
as well leave a legacy for the aeons. And, conversely, if you lack
honour all future people will loath you and your descendants will
carry that stigma in shame. An example of this is the traitor of the
Spartans at the Battle of Thermopylae (the famous "300"), whose name
was Ephialtis. That was a regular name at some point that no sensible
Greek will ever name their son after, given the dishonour of treason.

With those behaviours in place, you effectively get a society that
works decently even when there are no strong rules enforced by a
central government. This, too, has been a fixture of the Greek world
which was for millenia a patchwork of small colonies and city-states.
That is now changing with the creation of the centralist and
centralising nation-state which, unsurprisingly, has led to an erosion
of the communitarian ethos and its accompanying philotimy.
