---
title: "Conditioning the inner critic"
excerpt: "Comment on the voice inside of our head that reminds us of our standards and how we can work with it."
---

The inner critic is that voice of ours that reminds us of the
standards we set for ourselves. Those may be of our own making or
forced upon us by the role we assume in society. Whatever their
origin, standards serve a normative function: to judge what we have
against what we ought to have. Having such a critic is a consequence
of caring or, simply, of being self-aware. As such, it is highly
unlikely that we can altogether silence or remove that voice from
inside of our head. It will keep nagging us, always drawing
comparisons and continuously keeping us on edge. Muting it would
probably not be a good idea, anyway, else we risk falling into
complacency and ultimately disintegration.

I am happy with the standards I set for myself. They are demanding and
inspire me to keep going. I am not sated when, for example, I have
published one article but still have plenty of free time for another
(like today). If I can do better, I want to be putting in the effort.
Failure is acceptable, provided I did not take the easy way out. For
example, I am now typing these words. If the thoughts do not flow
_alla prima_, I will accept defeat and recognise my limits. But I
shall never give up ahead of time when the outcome is not already
clear (if I have 10 minutes of battery left, then I will not even try
because I know I cannot write a comprehensive entry in such a short
time).

The inner critic is a ruthless bastard. Nobody questions him while he
has the power to destroy me. At least such was the dynamic at times
when I did not treat myself with enough respect. I would labour under
a double standard where it was acceptable for others to fall short of
their stated values while I could not afford to show any sign of
weakness. I eventually learnt to care for myself at the emotional
level. This is still a tough form of love, mind you, in which I still
demand hard work, but I nevertheless do not despise failure. To fail
while trying in earnest is honourable. Indeed, this is the essence of
sportspersonship: there can only be one winner but the losers are
still honouring their peers and respecting themselves by following the
rules and by gracefully accepting the loss.

Sore losers are those who do not want to work with their inner critic
in pursuit of improving themselves. In their head, they are faultless
as it is always some external factor that prevents them from achieving
their goals. In sport the dynamics are fairly simple, but the same
applies to the more complex world of our quotidian life. I can expound
at length on all the systemic features that make my efforts harder
and, at times, I am justified to believe that I am at the receiving
end of structural injustice. Yet I do not want to stop there. That is
what the sore loser or the defeatist does. I want to work day and
night in preparation for the day when I make one step forward and then
continue on to eventually reverse the trend. I shall not relent and
will never allow all the analyses and their intellectuality to stand
as an excuse for inaction.

Insistence is not necessarily a virtue though. If the standard is not
realistic, then all the effort is futile and becomes self-destructive.
One must revise their views, bring the targets closer, while
acknowledging that those can be set to a higher level in the future.
The key is to remain adaptable by retaining situational awareness.

This is where conditioning comes in. While my inner critic cannot be
attacked directly, he can get used to a new state of affairs. His
impervious shelter does not save him from the changing environment. I
introduce disruptions in progressively more intense steps, thus
allowing myself time to come to terms with the new normal. The selfie
project I committed to recently is a testament to this mode of
conduct. It may sound strange to admit, but I detest looking at my own
pictures. "Something" unsettles me, but I cannot pinpoint it. I guess
knowing the cause does not really make a difference in this case, as
what I want is the same: to get used to something as simple as seeing
what the camera is showing, without any further considerations.

Controlled discomfort empowers us to grow. It does so by gradually
eroding the realm of the familiar. The known is not necessarily
comfortable, even though this is a common bias we have. Reason helps
us comprehend the drawbacks with what we have and then to anticipate
how things may stand in a future arrangement of the applicable factors
of the case.

"To what end?" is a question that ultimately forces us into
indecision. I do not need a transcendent telos to do this little
thing. By recognising the banality of the task---indeed the banality
of everything I do---I lower the stakes while also resisting the
temptation to faint knowledge of magnitudes outside the scope of what
I can fathom. "It is just a picture, mate", I would respond, "do not
overthink it".
