---
title: "Re: where do you find inspiration and willpower?"
excerpt: "Excerpt from a private exchange where I comment on my sources of inspiration and willpower."
---

The following is an excerpt from a private exchange. I am sharing it
with the permission of my correspondent. Their identity remains a
secret.

* * *

> I was wondering - where do you find inspiration? When I read your
> posts or watch your videos, I feel like you have a clear vision
> about what do you want in life, as well as a very strong willpower.
> Where do all of that come from? What guides your actions? I feel
> like I know where my life is heading to, and I think I am in a good
> direction overall, but anyhow sometimes I don't feel that
> inspiration, that willpower, to do the right thing this day that
> will lead me closer to my life goals. I keep thinking about previous
> failures, or getting distracted by trivialities that I know don't
> contribute anything to me. I am able to hide such things merely
> because my responsabilities are still small compared to my
> abilities, and so my carelessness does not hurt me too much. But I'm
> afraid the moment where that doesn't hold true anymore (which will
> probably happen soon), I'll just collapse under the heavy weight of
> reality.

I do not know if I have strong willpower or if that is my primary
driver. Yes, I am committed to the things I care about and do what I
must with them consistently and decisively. Though I never had the
capacity to bend the world to my will and "achieve greatness." The
macro view of my life is one of spontaneity and of going with the
flow. Things have been happening and I have simply been adapting to
them. At each phase, I would have an idea of what I wanted to do, but
I could not force it to happen.

When I was a teenager, I was single minded about becoming a
footballer. I was good at it and had the work ethic plus discipline to
continue. I did not care about school and was a bad student (was also
unruly, talked back to my teachers, skipped classes, ...). But I could
not achieve what I wanted because of forces outside my control. I got
injured, the support network to swiftly deal with that was not there,
and I had to change paths.

Then I ended up in college and started caring about intellectual
matters, so I became a good student. University life was a challenge
for me initially because I had to adapt to the practice of studying. I
was not used to that but I got the hang of it. Also, I had to work in
parallel to cover for all my expenses, so I never had the typical
"student life." It was home, work, school, work, home. Thinking back,
perhaps it is this very challenge that motivated me to keep going,
just so I could prove to myself I was capable of it.

My ambition at the time was to continue with my studies and to
accumulate all the formal qualifications I needed to become an
academic. But, again, I had not foreseen the eventualities: I got a
job in politics thanks to my blog/website which made me known to the
politician I ended up working with. I was a policy analyst for a few
years. Then I realised I did not really have a passion for formal
studies. In fact, I rediscovered my former athletic self's need for
action and physical intensity in response to what started to feel like
a dead end in my life: politics and office life at-large is not for
me.

So I ended up far away, literally and figuratively, from everything I
was working towards up until that point. I did manual labour,
discovered Linux in my free time, played around with the computer,
found Emacs, learnt to program, and also built my hut. None of this
was in my mind some years prior. I had no grand plan to be here. The
analogy, thus, is that I jumped off a cliff with the hope that I would
grow wings on the way down.

Maybe there is willpower there, which is what keeps me going. Sure. Or
maybe it is something to do with my attitude. What I notice in
retrospect is an unmistakable indifference: the sense that I do not
identify with any of my goals or achievements. So what if I once was a
footballer and unruly teenager? Now I am a good boy doing my studies.
So what if my job before politics was bartending? Now I do the
technical work of amending legislation and live among those powerful
people. So what if I worked at the European Parliament? Now I do
construction or work in the fields...

Indifference, then, manifests as defiance or shamelessness: I do not
feel I need to behave or look a certain way in response to some
standard of excellence, simply because I do not care what others think
about it. Concretely, in this moment I do not feel ashamed to say that
I am a philosopher despite the fact that I have no formal
qualifications for it (I would argue those are overrated, anyway, but
that may be just a rationalisation of mine). It may then be this
indifference that keeps me going, as I have no inhibition to rise to
the level of whatever challenge I am faced with.

With these in mind, I can answer the question of "what guides your
actions?" with "fun". Yes, fun! It has to be that, rather than some
master plan of careful consideration. I enjoy a challenge when it is
somehow close to heart. I did it when I would fight for every ball on
the football pitch (my nickname was "dog", which you know what it
means if you have tried to dribble past a dog). I did it when I had to
work and study. I do it now in establishing myself in my land. There
is a rational component to it, of me working towards a greater goal,
such as stability and safety, though I have to acknowledge the
visceral aspect, indeed the thrill, of doing something difficult.

About collapsing under the weight of a challenge, there is always a
chance this happens. Though consider that you have not put yourself to
the test and you might actually be able to cope with the challenge
once you commit to it. It is a matter of trying in earnest. Think of
some great athlete for inspiration. I remember when Lionel Messi,
arguably the greatest footballer of all time, missed the penalty in
the 2016 Copa America final against Chile. We can imagine how even
this unique genius of a player was experiencing doubt about his
abilities and how he was unsure whether he had it in him to deal with
the challenge. He failed then but came back stronger to show us what
he could achieve.

My attitude in this regard is the following: I might lose, yes, but
every fibre of my being will make sure this is a fight you will never
forget. It then is a matter of embracing our animalistic side, this
part of us that involves passion and emotion, instead of pretending we
are mere rational agents of action. Rationalism is a figment of
imagination that is taken for granted in certain fields of endeavour.
Life teaches us there is more to it though and that the
multifacetedness of our being cannot be reduced to a simple calculus
of rationally operating at the margin of optimality. Not only are we
not driven by pure reason, we also lack the requisite information or
knowledge to always make an accurate assessment of the case and of its
potential outcomes.

What, then, is the "clear vision" you ask about? It is the eagerness
to adapt, which is the other way of saying that you recognise how
little you really know about what is happening and shall transpire.
Life teaches as much. You have goals and express desires, yes, but you
ultimately work with what you have and accept it for what it is. This
is because there is a whole world out there outside your volition. It
does not revolve around you and will not accommodate your wants. If
you get what you want, then you are happy, but if you do not get it,
then you must also be content for learning something about you and/or
the world. It may be time for you to make changes, which is ultimately
what this world is all about. To what end? I do not know.

I am now meeting my goals. Is it because I have the willpower and do
whatever I want? Or because I ultimately lowered my target to
something achievable?

We do not choose to live, nor what life is exactly like, so why should
we be choosing every instance thereof? All we do is experience
phenomena as they unfold. It is a struggle, it is a pleasure, and all
the rest. It might also be fun, if we see it all as a game; as a
cosmic dance that simply happens.
