---
title: "Kore (Girl) XXXX-2025"
excerpt: "Kore was a stray female dog that I met a few years ago and which followed me around my mountains."
---

The vet called earlier to report on your passing. Two weeks of care
were not enough to undo the damage of disease and old age. When I last
saw you on Thursday, I knew we would not meet again. You could barely
move your paws.

Nothing is permanent in our life. We cannot affect the greater
magnitudes and are powerless to either hold on to anything or take it
with us. Whatever little control we have, we may use it in the service
of a lofty cause such as to develop a bond between our species; an
enduring friendship built on mutual trust and respect.

Experience is a series of moments. We let the details fade away as we
cherish the impression of the little things that we hold dear. I thus
remember you from a few weeks ago, when you finally decided to find
shelter in my hut. You learnt from Atlas how to knock on the door and
did it in the early morning hours of one of January's heavy storms.
Despite the noise caused by the rain, I heard you or, perhaps, I
somehow felt your plea, and opened the door. You wagged your tail and
ran in exuberantly, as you quickly found your way to a corner that you
made your own. I was happy that you were comfortable, though I could
tell that something had changed. This was not normal. You must have
been aware that our time together was running out.

Many humans think they are the only ones who possess language and are
thus entitled to some special treatment by the heavens. It is because
they do not know any better. Those of us who commit hours each day to
our beloved animals know that you possess language in all of its
manifestations, verbal and non-verbal, and that we humans can
accurately communicate with you. It is what you and I always did.

You were cautious not to come indoors, opting instead to sleep
somewhere close to my habitat. These past few months, I would
frequently find you sunbathing on the grass in front of my room or
sleeping under the solar panels. Whenever I would go out with Atlas
and Raizou, you would follow us for a little while even though you did
not have the stamina to keep up with us. Still, you were there showing
your friendship.

I first met you seven years ago. It was a sunny February morning. You
appeared at the village without a collar and had no chip on you. This
is a common phenomenon in the mountains, as hunters abandon their dogs
on the premise that they are not suitable for hunting. You were no
hunting dog though. Those are typically afraid of people. They have no
chance of survival because they have been subject to such neglect and
abuse that they do not trust humans, including those who, like me,
would like to offer their help. You must have been some nice person's
pet. Perhaps they suffered a misfortune and you were then forced to
leave your home. Nobody knew your name, so they ended up calling you
"Kore" (Κόρη), the Greek word for "girl" or "daughter".

That was seven years ago and two relocations away from where I
currently am. At the time, I did not have the means to take care of
you. The neighbours were providing you with food and you found shelter
in an abandoned house nearby. We quickly became friends, as you would
see me multiple times a day hiking together with Atlas.

When I left that village in desperate search for another room, I did
not expect you to follow in my footsteps. A few days after I had moved
to the nearby village, I found you roaming around my new place at the
time. The dynamic of our relationship was the same: we would go for
walks together, you following in our footsteps at a distance, while
you would retain your freedom throughout the day as a stray animal
that was still taken care of by the entire neighbourhood. It was then
no longer a surprise when you followed me once again, this time to the
hut where you lived peacefully for the last year and a half.

As the full moon rises from the east, I hold dear the memory of your
friendship. Thank you!
