---
title: "Thus begins the selfie project"
subtitle: "In which I may or may not appear naked"
excerpt: "I will be taking selfies and posting them on a daily basis."
---

**UPDATE 2025-09-16 09:17 +0300:** There now is a dedicated "selfies"
section on my website: <https://protesilaos.com/selfies>.

* * *

A while back I noticed that I did not have a single selfie in my
phone's camera roll:
<https://protesilaos.com/commentary/2025-05-16-not-one-selfie/>. In
fact, there is no human element in the countless photos I have taken.
All one finds there is snapshots of my dogs and the surrounding
environment. Perhaps I have hitherto only identified beauty in the
animals and landscapes. It may be because it is easier for me to
discern the universal in the particulars of their presence. With
people I tend to think more in terms of the given arrangement, the
place and the interpersonal dynamics at play.

I plan to change this. I want to appreciate myself and others in a
different way. This can only start from within. There are no selfies
because, fundamentally, I do not like something about them. "What"
exactly I cannot tell. It does not matter, anyway. I shall condition
myself to pay attention to what the camera is telling me. This is the
time of acceptance; of committing to a course of action that cannot be
undone. Hence the publicity of it: to have an external accountability
structure, to empower others to call me out in the scenario where I
renege on my promise.

Behold me outside my hut (click to enlarge):

<a href="{{'/assets/images/self/2025-09-15.jpg' | absolute_url }}"><img alt="Selfie of Protesilaos outside the hut" src="{{'/assets/images/self/2025-09-15.jpg' | absolute_url }}"/></a>

The plan is to take a selfie each day and put it online. From today
until the end of 2025. I do not know yet if I can host a lot of high
resolution pictures on my website---I must review the terms of my
service provider... If I cannot keep them directly on
`protesilaos.com`, then I shall create some social media account for
this purpose (I am unaware of the options as of now). I admit that I
am not enthusiastic about social media, but it is a sacrifice I am
willing to make for the greater good of appreciating people in this
new light.

And, in case it is not obvious, I might draw inspiration from the
Greek gods---my gods---when thinking about the next theme of the
selfie.

`peacock-mode` enabled!
