---
title: "Wildfires in Cyprus; I am okay"
excerpt: "A status update on the ongoing wildfires in my part of Cyprus. I am fine and ready to abandon my hut if necessary."
---

The district of Cyprus where I live has been experiencing wildfires
since Wednesday afternoon. My specific location is further north from
the hotspots, though large parts of the mountains where I do my
everyday walks have had fires and were burning throughout the night.
Many villages have been evacuated.

The authorities are working hard to abate the flames. Two specialised
planes are now flying over my place. There still is a fire raging
within ~25 minutes of walking speed from here. The air smells of ash
even where there are no fires.

The calamity is ongoing. News reports inform us that a large part of
the electricity grid is damaged, leaving many settlements without
power. There have been human casualties and loss of property. I work
with off-grid solar panels and mobile Internet, meaning that I
continue to be available as usual.

I have been calm the whole time and continue to mind my business, all
while remaining vigilant and ready to act. I stayed awake all night,
monitoring the situation in my immediate vicinity. As part of my
precautionary planning, I walked towards my two likely escape routes
to confirm they are unaffected. I can count on this continuing to be
the case due to how the wind is blowing. Plus, I will adapt depending
on the phenomena.

My plan, in case of emergency, is to abandon the hut. I will take with
me a backpack with my laptop, my critical documents, a torch, a face
mask, some small tools like a knife and a pair of scissors, and some
dry food plus a few bottles of water. I can carry all this as well as
my two puppies. The puppies are too young to cover long distances.
They can walk for a little while but will require plenty of breaks. My
two older dogs will join me on foot as they can cover long distances
just fine. I know these mountains very well and can reach any spot
within a few hours, including the coastline. Everything will be fine!

This is a time of readiness. Each of us has to stay on alert and do
what they must to protect lives.
