---
title: 'Comment on resisting techno-digital dystopia'
excerpt: 'What I think about the most effective response to technologically-capable tyranny.'
---

I was asked for my opinion on the challenges raised by potentially
repressive technologies.  The idea is how can one protect themselves
from the seemingly omnipotent state, especially in light of the
technological means at its disposal.

The following is my initial take on the subject.  I am sharing it with
the proviso that I do not consider it a comprehensive analysis and may
still elaborate further in some future essay.

* * *

I think we need to frame dystopia that is powered by digital technology
as yet another form of tyranny.  This is not to trivialise it—if
"trivialising" can ever apply to _tyranny_—, nor to downplay its
potential for destruction or otherwise equate it ideologically with
other totalitarian regimes.  By understanding it as a tyranny, we
provide ourselves with an already well-understood conceptual framework
to reason about it.

Every tyranny consists in the control of the vast majority of people by
a small group of individuals.  It is always a minority that wields power
within the confines of the given polity's scope of sovereignty or reach.

For a minority to rule over the majority, it obviously requires access
to critical resources but, more importantly, it must have a comparative
advantage of coordination relative to the subjects of its will.

The minority has to act as a unit, while the majority remains divided
and unorganised.  The principle of "divide and conquer" is a constant in
all hitherto existing statecraft.  The state of technology or the
prevailing conditions in general may only alter the specifics on the
implementation front.

That principle captures the irreducible factor of the case, which
constitutes the relative strength of the tyrants over the oppressed.
Disorganised people are vulnerable, exploitable, and can more easily be
forced into supporting the regime or otherwise acquiescing to its
stratagems.

Couched in those terms, tyranny is both (i) an immediately recognisable
architecture of supreme political authority, and (ii) a widespread
mindset that is characterised by inertness, indifference, helplessness,
and fatalism.  To resist oppression one must not merely guard against
the legal-institutional, economic, technological, or such readily
discernible establishment.  They must also overcome the centripetal
forces generated by the people's inability to act.

History tells us that a group which functions as a unit can exert
greater power than that of its constituent elements in isolation.  It
acquires an emergent property, germane to the concerted action as such.
Tyranny governs through the unity of its members, but also by mastering
the reign of fear.  Terror spreads like a virus, especially when those
being terrorised remain exposed by virtue of their forced/induced turn
towards short-term-focused egocentrism.

What else is contagious though is courage and the duty to express
opposition to injustice.  If the oppressors can gain an advantage by
cooperating among themselves, then so can an opposing force that starts
out as small in scale.  It cuts both ways.

The resistance does not need to be carried out by a majority of people
at once.  Indeed it never is possible to arrive at that eventuality
without going through intermediate phases.  There must initially be a
fairly tightly-controlled collective that is self-governed and guided by
agreement of spirit and a clear sense of purpose.  This agent of reform
is enough to help spread courage, so that the majority may eventually
agree to contribute towards enacting regime change.

The members of the resistance must stand united, in solidarity to each
other.  The starting point is to undermine that inter-personal
comparative advantage of the oppressors by means of grassroots action.
Remember that part of tyranny's power is contingent on the inertness of
the majority.  This is where activism must focus its immediate
attention: to show the alternatives in concrete terms, to build networks
of exchange and genuine support.

While it is clear that one can contribute incrementally to global shifts
by means of localised action, it also is the case that one may
appreciate the universal truth by discerning an instance of it.  As
such, activism must promote cases of freedom-respecting and
freedom-enhancing media or practices as tangible examples of modes of
possible inter-subjective experience: they offer a hint as to what a
freed world could look like.

At any rate, a critical mass is required.  Coordination and cooperation
will always be part of the solution to the problem.  Everything else
will follow from there.  The technological means will vary, as will the
figures and the ideocentric parameters or whatever other contributing
factor to such a state of affairs.

To my mind, techno-digital dystopia can be reduced to "dystopia", which
in turn implies tyranny.  By claiming as much, I wish to stress the
importance of the human qua social animal side of things: how concerted
action is essential to the cause.

It is crucial to understand that no amount of freedom-friendly
technology is ever enough to render one immune to the vicissitudes of
the establishment's machinations.  Nature and history tell us that there
is safety in numbers.  It is naive, indeed self-defeating, to believe
that one can effectively fend off aggression while remaining strictly
limited to their individuality.

To this end, all calls for apolitical escapism, those that present
individualism as its own telos, must be interpreted as impediments to
the possible creation of an antipode to the status quo.  Such times call
for collective efforts and an appreciation of the longer-term dimension
of the pro-liberty struggle; liberty as experienced by each person
(subjective) and as enabled by one's milieu (inter-subjective).

Finally, I think we are not in a generalised dystopia right now, at
least not in my part of the world.  Regardless, we must always be wary
of the establishment's potential: it does have the means and the
propensity to proceed down that path.  To think that some constitution
or court of law will single-handedly upset the repressive turn is to
remain oblivious to the lessons of history, including those of the near
past and, in parts of the world, of the present.  No institutional
arrangement can defend itself.  It is always people who may safeguard
the prevailing values that can otherwise be codified in statutes and
other rules.
