---
title: "When your country is a theme park"
excerpt: "The tourism industry is turning my country into an empty shell, designed to appeal to visitors at the expense of locals."
---

A theme park is a place designed to engender the impression that it
came out of a work of fantasy or that it exists in a time capsule.
Visitors expect to meet their favourite characters or witness familiar
exhibits take a life of their own; a life that would otherwise not be
given to them. It is a highly curated experience. There is
make-belief, everything is pretty, and everybody is happy.

Policy-makers and investors have gotten the memo: a theme park is good
business, your country is a brand, ergo it is to be unscrupulously
exploited. The country's image towards visitors is to be packaged a
certain way to appeal to those with a mere superficial interest in the
local culture. In turn, the culture is to be moulded into a caricature
of itself. The parts of it that are typical of the locality shall be
exaggerated and offered in spades. Those who are participating
in---and contributing to the continuous making of---the living
culture will be pushed to the margins, forced away from the hotspots
of tourist attraction, and blamed for breaking the immersion. Their
land shall be appropriated by rapacious "foreign direct investment"
as they themselves will become alienated from a world that no longer
represents them.

Such is the reality of my part of the planet. The first time I got a
hint of the demand for a theme park version of historical reality was
a few years back when a British woman of Cypriot descent was asking to
buy some handkerchief that was typical of marriages held over a
century ago. I explained how Cypriots do not marry this way anymore.
To no avail... For her, this item is the irreducible factor of a
Cypriot marriage: that which adds the unmistakable Cypriotness to the
event. What the contemporary people do is apparently not genuine. In
truth, hers was but a kitsch, a misunderstanding of culture as
gimmickry rather than a lived experience and a life form unto itself that
changes with the times. I could still understand her though, as her
ancestors took a snapshot of their local culture with them when they
left for Great Britain. Yet the idea of some product encapsulating the
quintessential local identity is exactly how the theme park is set up,
as the simulacrum of what once was or the depiction of what should
ever be.

There is a small village close to where I live that is undergoing
large-scale renovations. The plan is to make the place more attractive
to visitors. The central government has thus taken the initiative to
draw the schematics and enforce its "quality standards". This means
that the built-up area is being turned into yet another gentrified
milieu that is indistinguishable from other such "authentically
Cypriot" places. The original character, which took form organically
through the ages, is gone. At the local taverns, visitors are treated
to ostensibly local dishes, only those are gourmet renditions of
recipes that no real person here ever makes at home. To further insult
our intelligence, servings consist of tiny portions presented in
disproportionately large plates. Again, nobody actually eats this way
outside the controlled environment. It does not matter. The theme park
is all about reinforcing a belief in the verisimilitude of a product.
The trick is to maintain a shadow play of consumerist cosmopolitanism
in which there appears to be a unifying global culture that simply has
its own cute little particularities from one locale to another.

This is the result of homogeneisation, of mass production, and of
streamlined marketing. The true culture is threatened with extinction
because its people are impoverished and pressured to move out of the
way. There are no locals serving guests at those taverns, for example.
Not one! The waiters have been imported for pennies from some
unidentifiable place far away. The remaining residents who are still
related to the old stock are already competing for shelter with more
affluent "digital nomads" and those bent on finding a more favourable
tax jurisdiction for their liquid assets. The time for the remaining
locals to be priced out of the market beckons.

At some point, the authorities will approve of new zoning regulations
to set up apartments for everyone. Not for locals, mind you.
Accommodation shall be optimised to host short-term tourists at
exorbitant rates. This is the twisted logic of profiteering: sell a
cheap imitation of the local culture while actively undermining the
longer-term wellness of the real thing.

The homeland thus becomes nothing but a glorified fiefdom with fancy
flags, vacuous anthems, absurd military parades, and all the pompous
paraphernalia of nation-statism; a fiefdom to which we pay ever-more
taxes and get scorn in return. The authorities do not actually care
about us, the preservation of our spaces, and the continuation of our
ways of life. No! All they understand is easy money, much of which
will circulate under the table and find its way to shadowy coffers.

Some apparatchiks in the capital are deciding for us in our absence
how our communities should be refashioned based on some grand agenda
to placate the investors and to woo travellers with the disposable
income to realise their whimsy. What we get is contempt and smugness
each time we happen to walk through our streets with our dogs at an
inopportune time. Our new masters expect us to disappear, to slither
in the dark so as not to ruin their curated experience. We present an
inconvenience because we break the theme.

Too bad I have no manners and shall not apologise to anyone who thinks
they own the place just because they organised some "authentically
Cypriot wedding".

Fuck you and your fairytales!
