---
title: "Games: Limbo"
excerpt: "A puzzle platformer with a dark aesthetic and solid mechanics."
---

_Limbo_ is a puzzle platformer with a dark aesthetic (**spoilers
below**). It has a monochromatic colour palette while the entire
screen is rendered through a grainy film filter. You assume the role
of what appears to be a boy: its silhouette is grey while its eyes
emit light. This is all you know about your character.

It is not clear where you are and what exactly is happening to the
world around you. You wake up in the middle of some indeterminate
place and must walk to another location. Even completing the game does
not tell you much of what is going on. The ending leaves everything
open to interpretation. There is no dialogue or any hint you can read
on. Just unending darkness.

_Limbo_ is all about the gameplay and its attendant vibes. The actions
you may perform are basic directional motions and a single jump. There
are no power-ups or tools you may acquire. Beside your innate motions,
you can interact with some objects in the environment to solve
puzzles, such as to push a crate around or pull a lever.

Each section represents a single puzzle. Solving it allows you to
progress to the next section. The problems you are confronted with
require both situational awareness and well-timed execution of
actions. In other words, you will die a lot until you figure out what
to do.

The _Limbo_ gameplay revolves around the idea of trial and error. A
small miscalculation and your life is forfeit. You respawn at the
point where the puzzle starts, which typically means that you are only
a few steps behind where you stopped. Dying is the means through which
you learn about the requirements of each puzzle.

This loop of death and rebirth as a vehicle for learning is a fecund
metaphor for how we recalibrate our corpus of knowledge. As we are
exposed to new information, the now incompatible part of us must be
left behind: it cannot form part of the new world. To err in honesty,
and to become aware of our mistakes, is to liberate ourselves from the
grip of the given falsehood. Those who are afraid to make mistakes,
those who do not admit to any wrong, those who choose to only show a
boutique view of their self, are not going to progress to the next
"puzzle" because they refuse to go through the cleansing baptism of
fire that is trial and error.

_Limbo_ executes its ideas well. The atmosphere is consistently eerie,
the environment remains unwelcoming throughout, the mechanics are
precise, and the puzzles are smart. It is a nice experience all
around.
