---
title: "Games: Gorogoa"
excerpt: "A brilliant puzzle game with valuable lessons for life."
---

_Gorogoa_ is a puzzle game where the player must arrange tiles on a
grid to progress the story (**spoilers below!**, plus philosophy). The
game's mechanics are simple: click to zoom in or out of interactive
elements in a picture, and drag a tile along the grid to reposition
it.

The plot involves a lad who spots an otherworldly creature as it moves
through the city. This person is inspired to research the origins of
what appears to be a dragon and to understand more about it. Such is
an endeavour that turns into a lifelong pursuit, maybe even an
obsession.

From the player's perspective, the story takes shape through
continuous exposure to phenomena, in the form of new pieces to the
puzzle. We are developing a narrative as we go, interpreting all of
the available information with the tools at our disposal.

This, alone, is a metaphor for how our life works and how we derive
meaning from whatever is peculiar to our condition. Nobody starts out
knowing why they are here and what all this is. There are no clear
answers, no manual with precise instructions, and no proof to justify
our most deep-seated hopes. We do that which our very being renders
inescapable.

The story of _Gorogoa_ unfolds through many levels of depth and
different perspectives. You click on some detail in a drawing to
discover another drawing unto itself. There are worlds nested within
worlds as you move in and out of them. This is an artistic
representation of the cosmos, only that is of infinite zoom levels.

Take a dog, for example. To speak of "a dog" is in some way precise
and in another completely arbitrary. There is a form that we discern
in the cosmic continuum of life as something that is distinct from the
totality, which we name "a dog". Though this is the case with a
certain scope of application, analogous to the effective zoom we have
in the game. At another level of abstraction there is no dog to be
discerned, for all we are dealing with are particles in a field or
galaxies as the tiny constituents of a greater organism. At each level
there are systems of systems.

Against this backdrop, to think of something as "fundamental" or "more
true" is to assume that there can be a given presence without the
preconditions for presence. It is, in other words, to fall into a trap
of statements, to take names literally, and thus to limit your
horizons. Metaphor, analogy, and simplification are all we can ever
employ to describe in finite terms that which is inexhaustible.

"That which is inexhaustible" is a figure of speech. It shows how we
cannot afford to provide a definition that covers everything, as such
a definition would be identical to the cosmos. Even the definition of
a dog is simplistic!

This is how many an intellectual suffers from overthinking and the
attendant uneasiness: they try to place boundaries on boundlessness.
Much like our hero in the story, it will take them a lifetime to
realise that however effective their digging is it will never probe
deep enough. Whatever they discover will not be the terminus, but
another starting point, which itself is arbitrary.

Coming back to the game, I admire the art direction of _Gorogoa_. Its
story-telling is subtle and effective. The gameplay is intuitive and
free from distractions. A fine piece all around!
