---
title: 'Released Modus themes 0.3.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest release of my highly-accessible themes for Emacs.'
---

I just published version `0.3.0` of the Modus themes.  These are my
highly-accessible themes for GNU Emacs.  They conform with the WCAG AAA
standard for colour contrast accessibility (a minimum contrast ratio of
7:1 between the foreground and background values).  You can find the
packages on MELPA:

+ `modus-operandi-theme` (light)
+ `modus-vivendi-theme` (dark)

Below is the complete log of all the relevant changes since `0.2.0`
(2019-12-18).

* * *

+ Add support for the following packages:
  * `apt-sources-list`
  * `calfw`
  * `counsel-css`
  * `counsel-notmuch`
  * `counsel-org-capture-string`
  * `cov`
  * `disk-usage`
  * `evil-visual-mark-mode`
  * `geiser`
  * `keycast`
  * `org-journal`
  * `org-noter`
  * `paren-face`
  * `powerline`
  * `vc`
  * `xah-elisp-mode`
+ Explicitly style the following packages (these were already covered,
  in terms of the colours they used, but are now targeted directly):
  * `calendar`
  * `counsel`
  * `cursor`
  * package (`M-x list-packages`)
+ Minor tweaks to face groups:
  * `dired`
  * `compile`
+ Fixes and refinements:
  * Documentation strings will now inherit the option for slanted
    constructs (off by default -- see the README about all the user
    options).
  * Comment delimiters have the same styles as the body of the comment
    to avoid inconsistencies when the option for slanted constructs is
    enabled.
  * The line number that is displayed in the compile log is now
    correctly styled.
  * Removed duplicate entries for `ivy-remote` and added
    `ivy-separator`.
  * Ensure that the minibuffer prompt is always above the minimum
    contrast ratio of 7:1, by using a more appropriate shade of cyan.
  * Properly reference a couple of variables in Modus Vivendi.
+ Internal adjustments:
  * Decouple the core `dired` faces from those of external packages.
  * Same for org and `org-recur`.
+ Minor documentation updates.

* * *

For more information, check the [git repository of the
modus-themes](https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes).
