---
title: 'Released Modus themes 0.4.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest release of my highly-accessible themes for Emacs.'
---

I just published version `0.4.0` of the Modus themes.  These are my
highly-accessible themes for GNU Emacs.  They conform with the WCAG AAA
standard for colour contrast accessibility (a minimum contrast ratio of
7:1 between the foreground and background values).  You can find the
packages on MELPA:

+ `modus-operandi-theme` (light)
+ `modus-vivendi-theme` (dark)

* * *

This is an overview of the changes since version `0.3.0` (2019-12-25).

Add support for:

+ `ert`
+ `flycheck-indicator`
+ `mentor`
+ `mu4e-conversation`
+ `powerline-evil`
+ `telephone-line`
+ `vc` (built-in version control)

Refinements to already-supported packages:

+ `company-mode` (several refinements)
+ `doom-modeline` (major review)
+ `helm` (several tweaks)
+ `hl-line-mode` (use unique background)
+ `ivy` (improve matching line)
+ `line-number-mode` (minor tweaks)
+ `markdown-mode` (comprehensive expansion)
+ `mode-line` (more appropriate styles for the highlight)
+ `powerline` (minor tweaks)
+ `region` (use unique background)
+ `swiper` (improve matching line in main window)
+ `whitespace-mode` (several refinements)
+ `mu4e` (tweak `mu4e-modeline-face` for consistency)

Miscellaneous:

+ Fix actual and potential problems with cursor faces that would distort
  the use of appropriate background and foreground colours. The
  documentation stipulates that the `cursor` face cannot be inherited by
  other faces, due to its peculiar nature of only recognising the
  background colour.
+ Add support for more bold constructs in code.  As with all such
  options, it is disabled by default, expecting the user to explicitly
  opt in.
+ Declare additional custom faces.  Only meant for internal use.
+ Subtle refinements to "active" colour values in both Modus Operandi
  and Modus Vivendi.  These mostly concern the mode line (with a few
  special exceptions), where emphasis has been placed on the need to
  provide greater contrast between accent values that can be used there.
+ Minor documentation refinements.

* * *

For more information, check the [git repository of the
modus-themes](https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes).
