---
title: 'Released Modus themes 0.5.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest release of my highly-accessible themes for Emacs.'
---

I just published version `0.5.0` of the Modus themes.  These are my
highly-accessible themes for GNU Emacs.  They conform with the WCAG AAA
standard for colour contrast accessibility (a minimum contrast ratio of
7:1 between the foreground and background values).  You can find the
packages on MELPA:

+ `modus-operandi-theme` (light)
+ `modus-vivendi-theme` (dark)

* * *

This release contains support for several new packages and lots of
refinements to existing ones.  A lot of work went into making the
themes more robust by reviewing the inheritance of styles from one
face group to another (in general, the `:inherit` property should not
be used frivolously).  Several subtle changes were made to the colour
palette of both themes to ensure consistency, enable more possible
combinations, and avoid potential ambiguity under certain potential
circumstances.

Overall, this release gives me confidence that the themes have reached
a fairly stable state.  What follows is an overview of the changes
since version 0.4.0 (2020-01-02).

Added support for:

+ `equake`
+ `flymake`
+ `focus`
+ `fountain` (aka `fountain-mode`)
+ `git-lens`
+ `git-timemachine`
+ `hi-fill-column`
+ `highlight-blocks`
+ `info-colors`
+ `lsp-mode`
+ `lsp-ui`
+ `proced` (built-in)
+ `regexp-builder` (built-in)
+ `suggest`

Refinements:

+ The header line uses its own dedicated colours.  Several changes
  were made in `eww`, `info`, `elfeed`, `magit`, `flycheck` to make
  sure that any accent value that appears there conforms with the
  overarching accessibility objective of the Modus themes (contrast
  ratio of >= 7:1, else WCAG AAA).
+ `ivy` no longer uses a box style for the current line, as that was
  not always reliable.  Appropriate colours are used instead.
+ `org-mode` blocks use a foreground value that distinguishes their
  opening and closing tags from source code comments.
+ The `org-ellipsis` face was configured to always inherit the looks
  of its respective heading or element, rather than have its own
  excessive styling.
+ `paren-match` has colours that are designed specifically for it.
  This is done to retain their utility while making sure they are not
  mistaken for some other type of feedback.
+ `magit` has explicit styles for the mode line process indicators,
  instead of inheriting from another face.  The intention is to use
  foreground values that are designed specifically for use on the mode
  line (the minimum contrast ratio requirement).
+ `erc` faces have been thoroughly reviewed in the interest of better
  usability.  Its mode line indicators now use appropriate colours.
+ The faces of the `messages` library have been thoroughly reviewed.
  This affects various email interfaces, but also `elfeed` entry
  metadata headings.
+ `whitespace-mode` no longer has a newline character that stands out.
  That kind of emphasis was not necessary, given that the symbol used
  is a dollar sign, which is already far more visible than a mid dot.
+ `font-lock` (generic syntax highlighting) has better colour
  combinations for regexp grouping constructs.
+ `rainbow-delimiters` was given its missing base error face.
+ `git-commit` comment action uses a slightly different foreground
  value than before to better match its context.
+ `isearch` and `query-replace` use colours that properly denote each
  action's utility.
+ `visual-regexp` has been reviewed to make the matching groups more
  distinct from each other.
+ `occur` and any other buffer that relies on the `match` face can now
  benefit from the new colour combinations, in that its results cannot
  be confused for the active `isearch` or `query-replace` or even
  their lazily highlighted results (or, indeed, of any other search
  tool).
+ `company` uses faces for its search feedback that are consistent
  with other search metaphors.
+ Emacs 27's new `:extend` property is only implemented where
  necessary (note that the latest release is version 26.3).

* * *

For more information, check the [git repository of the
modus-themes](https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes).
