---
title: 'Modus themes 1.5.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

Just published version `1.5.0` of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The detailed release
notes are reproduced below.

For any questions pertaining to this publication, feel welcome to
[contact me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

A patch to update the files that are shipped with Emacs28 will be sent
upstream later today (I need a break after taking several hours to write
this log).  The modus-themes package in GNU ELPA fetches its contents
from emacs.git, so expect an update shortly thereafter.

* * *

## Modus themes version 1.5.0

By Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com> on 2021-07-15

This entry outlines the set of changes made to the project since the
release of version 1.4.0 on 2021-05-25.  There have been over 130
commits since then.

Every colour-related modification referenced herein is always
implemented in accordance with the primary accessibility objective of
the themes for a minimum contrast ratio of 7:1 between background and
foreground values in their given combination (the WCAG AAA standard).
Such edits also account for colour-coding that is optimised for the
needs of users with red-green colour deficiency (deuteranopia or
variants).

Here is the URL of the manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>.
Or read it from Emacs by evaluating this form:

    (info "(modus-themes) Top")

The themes are built into Emacs version 28 (current development target),
and are available on GNU ELPA as well as other archives.


### Customisation options

#### Overview of new style of sets of properties

Several variables now accept a list of symbols as a value.  Those
represent properties, which can be combined with each other to realise
the possible styles.  The idea was to simplify their specification in
order to make them easier to both maintain and extend.  Thanks to Philip
Kaludercic for introducing this concept in issue 210:
<https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/210>.

The variables are:

+ `modus-themes-prompts` by Philip Kaludercic in merge request 43:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/43>

+ `modus-themes-mode-line` by Philip Kaludercic in merge request 40:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/40>.

+ `modus-themes-lang-checkers` by Philip Kaludercic in merge request 46:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/46>

+ `modus-themes-org-agenda`
+ `modus-themes-links`
+ `modus-themes-headings`
+ `modus-themes-hl-line`
+ `modus-themes-paren-match`
+ `modus-themes-region`
+ `modus-themes-syntax`

Take `modus-themes-syntax` as an example.  Up until version 1.4.0, it
would only accept a symbol, signifying a predefined style.  So we had
the possible value `faint` and another `faint-yellow-comments`.  To make
a third variant of the "faint" aesthetic, such as by combining it with
the "alt syntax" and/or "green strings", we would need to write new
presets in the form of `faint-green-strings`, `faint-alt-syntax`,
`faint-alt-syntax-green-strings`, `faint-green-strings-yellow-comments`,
`faint-alt-syntax-green-strings-yellow-comments`.  That would have been
inefficient, hence why it was not done.

With the new approach of defining a list of properties, those
combinations are all possible.  Such as:

    (setq modus-themes-syntax '(faint alt-syntax))

    (setq modus-themes-syntax '(yellow-comments alt-syntax green-strings))

The order in which the properties are set is not significant.

The doc string of each of the aforementioned variables, or the
corresponding entry in the manual, provides guidance on how to configure
things.  The old forms will continue to work for the time being, though
they are considered deprecated and will stop being supported at a future
date.


#### Changes in stylistic variants for variables with sets of properties

+ The meaning of the "alt syntax" style in `modus-themes-syntax` has
  been redefined.  In the past, it used to have green-coloured strings
  and doc strings.  Those are now red.  Some other changes have been
  implemented to make the overall looks more consistent.  Users who
  liked the old style can retain it by passing this list of properties:

      (alt-syntax green-strings)

  New styles for the "faint" aesthetic are possible, here shown as lists
  of properties:

      (faint green-strings)
      (faint alt-syntax)
      (faint alt-syntax green-strings)
  
  To each of those the `yellow-comments` property can be added as well.

  Consult the doc string or the manual for the technicalities and code
  samples.

+ The `modus-themes-hl-line` no longer has styles that include only an
  underline.  Those proved to be problematic under certain circumstances
  and were thus removed.

  Minor changes have been implemented to make the following combination
  of properties more consistent, by colourising the underline:

      (accented intense underline)

+ The `modus-themes-paren-match` now has styles that include an
  `underline` property.  Those extend the old options, such as:

      (bold intense underline)

+ The `modus-themes-headings` have an improved set of styles for the "no
  text color" aesthetic.  Those involve the `monochrome` property, which
  can now yield results that include a background (whereas before it was
  just colourless text for the headings, optionally without a bold
  weight).  As this is an alist, here is an example (always check the
  docs for fully fledged code samples):

      (setq modus-themes-headings
            '((1 . (background overline))
              (2 . (overline background rainbow))
              (t . (monochrome no-bold background))))

  To allow a heading level N to retain its original style, a `t` value
  can be passed.  In the previous version of the themes, it was possible
  to use `nil` for the same purpose, though that is no longer valid.  In
  those cases, the fallback value of the alist will be used instead,
  such as what is noted above:

      (t . (monochrome no-bold background))

+ The `modus-themes-links` provide several new possible styles, due to
  an expanded set of properties that includes, among others, `bold`,
  `italic`, and `background`.  The documentation covers the details.

+ The `modus-themes-lang-checkers` can now attain a style that uses a
  prominently coloured background in addition to what was available
  before as a subtle background and the other variants.


#### New variables

+ The `modus-themes-org-agenda` provides the means to refashion the
  entirety of the Org agenda buffer.  The value it accepts is an alist,
  with some keys expecting a symbol and others a list of properties.
  The minutia are covered in its doc string.  A possible configuration
  can look like this:

      (setq modus-themes-org-agenda
            '((header-block . (variable-pitch scale-title))
              (header-date . (grayscale workaholic bold-today))
              (scheduled . uniform)
              (habit . traffic-light)))

  `modus-themes-org-agenda` supersedes the old variable that was specific
  to the Org habit graph: `modus-themes-org-habit`.  There now is a
  `habit` key which accepts the same values as before, plus a new style
  that is optimised for users with red-green colour deficiency:
  `traffic-light-deuteranopia`.  Please consult the doc string of
  `modus-themes-org-agenda` or the relevant entry to the manual.
  
  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for contributing to the creation of this
  variable as well as to all other changes in the relevant faces that
  were done in the interest of usability.  A full report about
  `modus-themes-org-agenda` with screen shots is available here:
  <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2021-06-02-modus-themes-org-agenda/>.

  A patch has been sent to upstream Org, with its review pending, which
  improves upon some of the areas we had identified:
  <https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-orgmode/2021-06/msg00092.html>.

+ The `modus-themes-inhibit-reload` controls a new behaviour of
  automatically reloading the active theme when an option is set via the
  Custom interfaces or with `customize-set-variable`.  To opt-in to this
  feature, set the variable to a `nil` value.

  Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for implementing this in merge request 40:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/40>.

  In the development phase of this option, a bug was identified
  pertaining to recursion, as reported by Gustavo Barros in issue 213:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/213>.  Changes
  have been made to remove that possibility, as found in merge request
  45: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/45>.

  A thread was started on the emacs-devel mailing list to inquire upon
  the technicalities of this option, but it did not gain any traction:
  <https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2021-06/msg00828.html>.

  As such, we have decided to take our chances by pressing on with this
  feature.  Users who are interested in it are encouraged to give it a
  try and report any possible complications.  Issue 213 remains open.

+ The `modus-themes-italic-constructs` is the new name of the variable
  `modus-themes-slanted-constructs`.  The term "slant" was considered
  too vague or technical and some users could have missed the meaning of
  this option.

+ The `modus-themes-scale-5` is renamed to `modus-themes-scale-title` to
  better convey its utility.


### Changes to the manual

+ Rewrote or introduced the documentation for all the customisation
  options mentioned above.  Also updated relevant code samples, such as
  in the manual's introduction to the customisation options.  Evaluate
  this form for an annotated code overview:

      (info "(modus-themes) Customization Options")

+ Rephrased a reference to "gamma ray values" as "gamma values".  Thanks
  to Anders Johansson for the contribution in merge request 42:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/42>.

+ Removed the Org macro that would insert the build date in the manual's
  introduction.  This was required to make the file reproducible,
  otherwise it would keep changing each time a new version of Emacs was
  built.  Refer to Emacs bug#48661 by Glenn Morris:
  <https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/bugreport.cgi?bug=48661>.

+ Included note on tweaking the key hints that the Avy package produces.
  This is in response to issue 215 by Rudolf Adamkovič:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/215>.  Thanks to
  Nicolas De Jaeghere for providing the text.

+ Wrote a note on how to control the underlines that are generated in
  compilation-mode buffers and related.  It is about configuring the
  variable `compilation-message-face`.

+ Documented how to configure the colours that are applied to the names
  of the days in the `M-x calendar` interface.  The relevant variable is
  `calendar-weekend-days`.

+ Elaborated on a "do it yourself" (DIY) guide on how to benefit from
  the hidden feature of the themes about how they handle the bold weight
  and the italic slant.  In short, we do not hardcode values and thus
  make it easy for users to specify the particularities of what it means
  for a face to have a `bold` or `italic` attribute.


### Faces and face groups

#### New entries

Newly supported packages:

+ `ledger-mode`.  Thanks to Pengji Zhang for the feedback in issue 202:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/202>.

+ `gotest`.  Thanks to Jerry Zhang for the feedback in issue 226:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/226>.

+ `css-mode`

New faces for already supported groups:

+ `shr-h1`, `shr-h2`, `shr-h3`, `shr-h4`, `shr-h5`, `shr-h6` of the
  shr.el library (simple HTML renderer, as experienced in, for example,
  EWW).  Those are available for Emacs28, with a patch by me:
  <http://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/bugreport.cgi?bug=49433>

+ `apropos-button` as a generic face that fontifies faces in apropos
  buffers.  Available for Emacs28, with a patch by me:
  <https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/bugreport.cgi?bug=49162>.

+ `selectrum-mouse-highlight`.  This makes the mouse hover effect for
  selectrum look the same as in most other contexts.  Thanks to okamsn
  for the feedback in issue 203:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/203>.


#### Review of existing entries

+ Added an `:extend` property to `next-error` face.  This face is used
  for pulse effects.  It is good to have them extend to the edge of the
  window, so that they are easier to spot.  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for
  the feedback in issue 200, which is about pulse.el:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/200>.

+ Tweaked the various Apropos faces.  The idea was to remove the colour
  from the pseudo headings so that we would not get an exaggerated
  result of too much variety in the buffer (e.g. that of `M-x apropos`).
  The individual buttons retain their style as links, meaning that they
  are governed by the variable `modus-themes-links`.

+ Revised `whitespace-line` face to make it look like a warning, as it
  ought to be.  Thanks to Pengji Zhang for the feedback in issue 204:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/204>.

+ Reworked the colour-coding of the Hydra and Transient packages.  These
  are meant to tone down some excesses with the standard red and to
  adapt other colours to it.  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for providing
  suggestions and helping me tweak those in issue 206:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/206>.

+ Recoloured `transient-argument` to improve its uniqueness in its
  context and to better comply with the expectation of hydra-style
  colour coding, as noted right above.

+ Made the `org-agenda-done` face conform with the customisation option
  `modus-themes-success-deuteranopia`.  This means that it will be
  coloured in blue instead of green when the option is set to a non-nil
  value.

+ Grayed out the foreground of the Org block delimiter lines on the
  premise that any extra colouration was not needed, given the presence
  of a gray background and the overall markup of the block.

+ Toned down the colouration of the `org-code` face, so that it is
  consistent with `org-verbatim` as well as the colours used in opening
  and closing lines of blocks.  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for suggesting
  this change in issue 206, though it went through a couple of reviews:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/206>.

+ Simplified the inheritance of the `fixed-pitch` face, which is used
  for internal purposes to ensure alignment of elements in buffers that
  must cope with mixed font configurations, such as an org-mode file
  with `M-x variable-pitch-font` enabled.

  [ Recall that the option `modus-themes-no-mixed-fonts` can disable
    this feature.  Also note that the `mixed-fonts` package, or
    equivalent, is not needed while using the Modus themes (though there
    is nothing wrong with having them together). ]

+ Reduced the overall intensity of `org-mode-line-clock-overrun`.
  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for the feedback in issue 208:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/208>.

+ Simplified or otherwise tweaked several Org agenda faces to render
  possible the new `modus-themes-org-agenda` variable, as documented
  above.  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for the feedback in issue 208:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/208>.

+ Increased ever so slightly the foreground colour of the `highlight`
  face.  This can help improve the perception of highlights, such as
  upon hovering over a link with the mouse.  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič
  for reporting the potential problem in issue 216:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/216>.

+ Prevented the override of the `diff-context` face when users assign a
  `bg-only` value to the `modus-themes-diffs` variable.  This makes it
  consistent with the intent of this style, which is to work with a
  non-nil value for `diff-font-lock-syntax` (basically to allow the
  usual colour highlights of the underlying code syntax in diff
  buffers).

+ Ensured consistency of all prompt-related faces by introducing a new
  face, `modus-themes-prompt`, that is inherited by all others (all
  prompt styles are controlled by the variable `modus-themes-prompts`).
  This was originally implemented with the `comint-highlight-prompt`
  face, though that could potentially lead to undefined faces if the
  comint library was not loaded.  Whereas the `modus-themes-prompt`
  guarantees that we pass a known face at all times.  Thanks to Philip
  Kaludercic for bringing this potential bug to my attention in a
  comment to merge request 43:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/43#note_615224855>.

+ Removed the background colour from the `widget-inactive` face.  It
  would create problems in some cases, such as in Custom buffers for
  multiple choice options.

+ Refined `calendar-weekend-header` and `calendar-weekday-header` to
  emulate the design of physical calendars and remain truthful to the
  expectations set by the default configuration of the calendar.el
  library.  Weekends now use a faint red, while weekdays are rendered in
  the same subtle gray they had before.  The underlying principle is to
  make weekends convey a subtle warning to the effect that "this is not
  a day for work" (notwithstanding precarious economic realities).  As
  noted above, there is an entry in the manual on how to make all days
  look the same, be it gray or faint red.  Evaluate this form:

      (info "(modus-themes) Note on calendarel weekday and weekend colors")

### Request for feedback on a potential version 2.0.0 of the Modus themes

While we maintain a cautious stance towards preserving the default
styles, there are some cases where we might be forced to introduce
backward-incompatible changes.

Three such cases that can benefit from user feedback are:

+ Issue 196 on `modus-themes-no-mixed-fonts`
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/196>.

+ Issue 198 on `modus-themes-hl-line`
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/198>

  [ Note that `modus-themes-hl-line` now accepts a list of properties as
    described in the opening sections of this entry. ]

+ Issue 218 on `modus-themes-diffs`
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/218>.


### Miscellaneous

+ Recalibrated the value of the colour `bg-hl-line-intense` in the
  palette `modus-themes-vivendi-colors`.  The change should be
  practically indecipherable, though it slightly improves things in
  certain contexts.

+ Refined the intensity of the three main yellow colours in
  `modus-themes-vivendi-colors`.

+ Introduced a new `modus-themes-faces` group so that those are
  decoupled from the customisation options in the various Custom
  buffers.  Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for the patch in merge request
  39: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/39>.

+ Updated the manual's "Acknowledgements" section to include all new
  users who contributed to the project.

Thanks again to everyone involved!

