---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 0.9.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Extremely Fatigued of Themes Having Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Introduced the 'ef-cherie' and 'ef-cyprus' themes

`ef-cherie` is a dark theme with mostly pink, magenta, and gold
colours.  `ef-cyprus` is a light theme characterised by green, yellow,
teal, and red colours.

Read the announcements, which also include screen shots:

-   <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-10-25-ef-cherie/>.
-   <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-10-24-ef-cyprus-theme/>.

These themes bring the total number of the collection to 20, split
into an equal number of light and dark themes.

Note that some themes in the collection are designed as pairs.  Those
have `-light` or `-dark` in their name.  The others are standalone.
Regardless, the user can specify any two themes in the value of the
user option `ef-themes-to-toggle` and then switch between them with
the command `ef-themes-toggle`.  Or just use the other available
commands: `ef-themes-select` for minibuffer completion and the
`ef-themes-load-random` to load one from the collection (with a `C-u`
prefix argument to limit the set to light or dark themes). The
official manual explains more.

Will there be more themes?  Time will tell.  Though I think that
between those and the `modus-themes`, I have covered a very broad
range of preferences and requirements for accessibility.


## The 'ef-themes-select' optionally limits to light or dark

The command `ef-themes-select` can now accept a prefix argument (`C-u`
with the default key bindings).  It prompts for a selection between
light or dark themes and then uses minibuffer completion that only
includes the items of the given set.

Inspect the value of the variables `ef-themes-dark-themes`,
`ef-themes-light-themes` for what is included in each set.

[ Note that the command `ef-themes-load-random` has the same behaviour
  of limiting to a set when it reads a prefix argument. ]


## The 'ef-themes-load-random' reports the theme it loaded

The command `ef-themes-load-random` has received a quality-of-life
improvement to its functionality.  It now prints a message in the echo
area that includes the name of the theme it loaded.  The user can
review echo area messages by invoking the `view-echo-area-messages`
command, which is bound to `C-h e` by default.

This change makes it easier for the user to remember a theme they
liked.

Thanks to Federico Stilman for sharing with me the idea of reporting
the name of the randomly loaded theme.  This information is shared
with permission, as it was done via a private channel.


## Stylistic refinements

-   All themes have palette entries for colour-coded underlines.  Those
    are used by packages like `flymake` and `flyspell` to highlight
    errors and warnings.  All dark Ef themes had a bit too intense
    colours applied to those constructs.  These have now been toned down
    in order to avoid potential distractions.  They still perform their
    intended function, without drawing too much attention to themselves.

-   Almost all themes have a slightly more pronounced `border` colour.
    This is used to underline links and to draw the vertical line that
    separates Emacs windows (among others).  It still is a subtle grey,
    though it works better than before.

-   The `warning` mapping of many themes has been revised to be a more
    neutral yellow (I define hues as triplets of neutral, warmer,
    colder).  The previous style was a warmer shade of yellow, which
    brought it closer to red.  This, in turn, had the unintended effect
    of making the Org agenda potentially confusing.

-   The `mail-3` mapping of some themes has been tweaked to better stand
    out in its context, without prejudice to the overall character of
    its theme.  This colour is used by email clients that leverage the
    built-in `message.el` library (such as Gnus, Mu4e, Notmuch).  In
    short, if you edit messages with deeply nested quotes, you will have
    an easier time telling apart those inner levels.


## Support for packages, face groups, or faces

-   **auto-dim-other-buffers:** Added support for this package.  It
    applies a grey background to inactive windows.
-   **consult-separator:** This is the border that divides previews of
    registers when the user evaluates the following form and then
    invokes C-x r i: `(advice-add #'register-preview :override
      #'consult-register-window)`
-   **embark-collect-zebra-highlight:** The default value of this face is
    technically okay, though it is a neutral grey which does not look
    right with some of the Ef themes.
-   **flycheck:** Added support for this package and covered all its
    faces.  It looks like `flymake` as it leverages the same set of
    colour-coding that the themes define.
-   **flymake:** Expanded support to its fringe indicators.  Those are
    bitmaps that bring attention to in-buffer colour-coded underlines.
    They use an appropriate colour coding, like errors being red
    (depending on the theme&#x2014;see the deuteranopia and tritanopia
    implementations).
-   **help-key-binding:** This face is now rendered in `fixed-pitch`
    (monospaced font) when the user option `ef-themes-mixed-fonts` is
    non-nil.  This user option basically makes spacing-sensitive
    constructs retain their mono spacing, while all the rest can use a
    proportionately spaced font (e.g. enable `variable-pitch-mode` in
    Org buffers to see the effect&#x2014;changes to theme user options
    require a theme reload).
-   **ibuffer:** Added support for this built-in package.  Its marks look
    the same as those of Dired.
-   **image-dired:** Expanded support to two new faces it has for the
    `header-line`.  Those are part of Emacs 29.
-   **mm-command-output:** This is a built-in face we encounter on
    occasion in Gnus buffers.
-   **olivetti:** Made its `olivetti-fringe` face invisible.  We do not
    want to see the fringes when we enter `olivetti-mode` (it centres
    the contents of the buffer).  Note that the Ef themes do not have
    visible fringes, anyway, though a user may tweak the `fringe` face
    in their local setup.
-   **org-agenda-current-time:** Made this face use the main foreground
    colour.  It applies to the line that shows the current time in
    today's Org agend time grid.  The previous mapping to `variable` was
    giving us decent results, though this was a matter of serendipity:
    there is a chance that a theme maps an inappropriate colour to
    `variable` (e.g. red, which will interfere with deadlines).  This
    new design is just as legible, while it has the upside of reducing
    colouration where it is not needed, letting other elements get the
    attention they deserve.
-   **trashed:** Added support for this package.  It marks lines like
    Dired and follows the same stylistic patterns.  Unlike Dired, it has
    an extra "mark" type (select, delete, restore), which uses
    appropriate colouration.
-   **tty-menu:** This is the set of faces that are used in a text
    terminal when the `menu-bar-mode` is enabled and the user interacts
    with it via the command `menu-bar-open`.  Note, however, that the Ef
    themes are meant to be used either in a graphical Emacs frame or in
    a text terminal with very good support for colour reproduction.
    The themes do not look good in a generic terminal.
-   **writegood-mode:** Added support for this package.  Its style is
    consistent with `flyspell` as it uses the same colour-coding scheme.


## Faces defined by the Ef themes

The themes define some faces to make it possible to achieve
consistency between various groups of faces.  For example, all "marks
for selection" use the `ef-themes-mark-select` face.  If, say, the
user wants to edit this face to include an underline, the change will
apply to lots of packages, like Dired, Trashed, Ibuffer.

All the faces defined by the themes:

-   `ef-themes-fixed-pitch`
-   `ef-themes-heading-0`
-   `ef-themes-heading-1`
-   `ef-themes-heading-2`
-   `ef-themes-heading-3`
-   `ef-themes-heading-4`
-   `ef-themes-heading-5`
-   `ef-themes-heading-6`
-   `ef-themes-heading-7`
-   `ef-themes-heading-8`
-   `ef-themes-key-binding`
-   `ef-themes-mark-delete`
-   `ef-themes-mark-other`
-   `ef-themes-mark-select`
-   `ef-themes-ui-variable-pitch`
-   `ef-themes-underline-error`
-   `ef-themes-underline-info`
-   `ef-themes-underline-warning`
