---
title: "Emacs: denote version 0.3.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Fixed how references are analysed to produce the backlinks' buffer.
    This should resolve the issue that some users faced where the
    backlinks would not be produced.

    The previous implementation would not yield the appropriate results if
    (i) the value of the user option `denote-directory` was a "project"
    per the built-in project.el and (ii) the link to the given entry was
    from a subdirectory.  In short, the references were sometimes returned
    as relative file paths, whereas they should always be absolute.
    Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the feedback in issue 42 over
    at the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/42>.

    [ Jean-Philippe has assigned copyright to the Free Software
      Foundation.  It is a prerequisite for contributing to core Emacs
      and/or any package distributed via the official GNU ELPA. ]

-   Addressed a regression in the function `denote-directory` (this is the
    function that normalises the variable of the same name) which
    prevented it from returning an expanded file path.  This too
    contributed to problems with the backlinking facility.  Thanks to
    Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the contribution in pull request 44 over
    at the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/44>.

    Also thanks to user pRot0ta1p for the relevant feedback in issue 43
    (also on the mirror): <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/43>.
    More thanks to Alfredo Borrás, Benjamin Kästner, and Sven Seebeck for
    their comments in a related thread on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3CCA73E705-1194-4324-9962-70708C4C72E5%40zoho.eu%3E>.
    These discussions showed we had a problem, which we managed to
    identify.

-   Introduced the user option `denote-prompts` (read its doc string or
    the relevant entry in the manual).  It governs how the standard
    `denote` command for creating new notes will behave in interactive
    usage.  By default, `denote` prompts for a title and keywords.  With
    `denote-prompts`, the command can also ask for a file type (per
    `denote-file-type`), subdirectory of the `denote-directory`, and a
    specific date+time.  Prompts occur in the order they are specified.
    Furthermore, the `denote-prompts` can be set to values which do not
    include the title and keywords.  This means that the resulting file
    names can be any of those permutations:

        DATE.EXT
        DATE--TITLE.EXT
        DATE__KEYWORDS.EXT

    Recall that Denote's standard file-naming scheme is defined as follows
    (read the manual for the details):

        DATE--TITLE__KEYWORDS.EXT

    For our purposes, Denote will work perfectly fine for linking and
    backlinking, even if file names do not include the `TITLE` and
    `KEYWORDS` fields.  However, the user is advised to consider the
    implications on usability: notes without a descriptive title and/or
    useful keywords may be hard to filter and practically impossible to
    manage at scale.  File names without such information should at least
    be added to subdirectories which themselves have a descriptive name.

    At any rate, Denote does not have strong opinions about one's
    workflow.  The standard file name is the culmination of years of
    experience.

    Consider the `denote-prompts` the affirmative answer to the question
    "Can keywords be optional?" as posed by Jack Baty on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C8D392BC3-980A-4E5B-9480-D6A00BE8279F%40baty.net%3E>.

    Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the original contribution in
    commit 9b981a2.  It was originally part of a pull request, but due to
    some internal changes I had to merge it as a patch and technically the
    web UI did not count the PR as "merged" (though it was in terms of
    substance).

-   Refactored the `denote` command to (i) accommodate the new user option
    `denote-prompts` via its interactive specification and (ii) be more
    flexible when called from Lisp.  The latter scenario is for advanced
    users or, generally, those who can maintain some custom code in their
    configuration.  A case in point is one of the examples we show in the
    manual for a programmatic way to create notes that automatically get
    the `journal` tag:

        (defun my-denote-journal ()
          "Create an entry tagged 'journal', while prompting for a title."
          (interactive)
          (denote
           (denote--title-prompt)
           '("journal")))

    Notice that the `'("journal")` is a list of strings even for a single
    keyword.  Whereas before a single one was a plain string.  This is a
    breaking change.

    Please consult the doc string of the `denote` command for the
    technicalities.

-   Refashioned the interactive convenience functions of `denote-type`,
    `denote-date`, `denote-subdirectory` to leverage the `denote-prompts`
    user option while calling `denote` interactively.  In practical terms,
    they no longer accept any arguments when called from Lisp.  Users who
    need a programmatic approach are advised to either call `denote`
    directly, or check how these commands `let` bind the `denote-prompts`
    to carry out their operations.  The doc string of each command
    explains how it works.  Or evaluate this to check the manual:

        (info "(denote) Convenience commands for note creation")

    Else visit:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:887bdced-9686-4e80-906f-789e407f2e8f>

-   Documented how the user option `denote-directory` can accept a local
    value.  This is pertinent to scenaria where the user needs to maintain
    separate directories of notes.  By "separate" we mean sets of notes
    that do not communicate with each other, cannot create links between
    them, etc.  The manual delves into the technicalities.  If you have
    the Info entry installed, evaluate:

        (info "(denote) Maintain separate directories for notes")

    Else visit:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:15719799-a5ff-4e9a-9f10-4ca03ef8f6c5>.

    Thanks to user "Summer Emacs" for starting the discussion on the
    mailing list, and Benjamin Kästner for their participation:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm25yk5e856.fsf@gmail.com%3E>.

-   Added an entry to the manual's Frequently Asked Questions about a
    failed search for backlinks.  It includes sample code that users of
    Windows can apply, if necessary.  (The error is not Denote's fault.)
    Thanks to Benjamin Kästner for the patch, which is below the ~15 line
    threshold and thus does not require copyright assignment to the Free
    Software Foundation:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cce117b14-55cf-622e-6cd8-0af698091ae3%40gmail.com%3E>.

-   Removed duplicate entries from the list of file paths that the `xref`
    library returns for the purposes of backlinking.  Thanks to
    Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the contribution in pull request 44 on
    the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/44>.

-   Applied an appropriate face to the backlinks' button to mitigate an
    error.  Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the contribution in
    pull request 45 on the GitHub mirror and for later testing a
    subsequent tweak: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/45>.

-   Simplfied all the faces we define to make them work with all themes.
    The previous colours were consistent with the `modus-themes`:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>.

-   Refined how strings are sluggified under all circumstances.  Before, a
    nil value for the user option `denote-allow-multi-word-keywords` would
    have the adverse effect of joining all the strings in the title field
    of the file name.  The intent always was to do that only for
    multi-word keywords, not the title.  This change was part of a hotfix,
    formalised as version `0.2.1` a day after the release of `0.2.0`.

-   Made the fontification rules more robust, while avoiding any false
    positives.  This was done over a series of commits as it had
    implications for the file name permutations that were mentioned
    earlier.  Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the patches and/or
    discussion about the merits of each change and concomitant
    considerations:
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/36>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/38>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/40>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/42>

-   Rewrote all relevant entries in the manual to reflect all the
    user-facing aspects of the aforementioned.

-   Discussed a use-case of rewriting old journal entries as Denote-style
    files.  As of this writing, we do not support migration of files in
    bulk.  It might happen at some point, though it is no mean task.
    Thanks to Summer Emacs and Alan Schmitt for their participation:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm27d4mbktj.fsf%40gmail.com%3E>.

    An aside here as this topic was brought up: my packages are open to
    users of all skill levels and is why I maintain a mailing list as well
    as mirrors of the official git repository on SourceHut.  Do not
    hesitate to ask a question.  If, for whatever reason, those
    communication channels are not appropriate, you are welcome to contact
    me in private: <https://protesilaos.com/contact>.

Thanks again to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the numerous contributions.
Please read the commit log for the minutia, as this change log entry
omitted some of the finer yet important details.
