---
title: "Emacs: denote version 1.1.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## New commands or refinements to common use-cases

-   The `denote-link-add-missing-links` is a companion to what we
    already provide to produce a list of links to Denote files matching
    a regular expression (the `denote-link-add-links`).  This new
    command adds links that are not already present in the current file.
    So if you have a metanote that references, say, your journal entries
    but have not updated it in a month, you can revisit the metanote,
    invoke `denote-link-add-missing-links`, and then type the search
    terms (e.g. `_journal`) to include what remains.

    Thanks to Elias Storms for the initial contribution, which was
    done in pull request 108 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/108>.

    Elias has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.  It is
    required for changes that exceed 15 lines in total.

-   The `denote-link-find-backlink` provides a minibuffer interface that
    shows all backlinks to the current note.  It complements the
    existing `denote-link-backlinks` command (which also has the alias
    `denote-link-show-backlinks-buffer`).  Each command has its own
    niche: the minibuffer lets the user leverage powerful pattern
    matching styles, such as those provided by the `orderless` package,
    while the bespoke buffer provides an easy overview of what links to
    the current note.

    Thanks to Elias Storms for the original patch:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm2fsg6o2t6.fsf%40MBA21.fritz.box%3E#%3Cm2pmfam7yi.fsf@MBA21.fritz.box%3E>.

-   The `denote-keywords-add` and `denote-keywords-remove` are two
    commands that interactively operate on the current note's front
    matter to add or remove keywords.  They use the familiar keywords'
    prompt which means, among others, that they can read more than one
    keyword at a time.  To specify multiple keywords, separate each
    input with a comma (or whatever the value of `crm-separator` is,
    which should be a comma unless something out-of-the-ordinary is in
    force).

    Thanks to Elias Storms for the original patch, which was done as
    part of a discussion on the mailing list and then iterated on:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm24jwvpbt2.fsf%40MBA21.fritz.box%3E#%3Cm28rlik0tc.fsf@MBA21.fritz.box%3E>.

-   The `denote-link` command will now recognise an active region and
    use its text as the description of the inserted link.  The default
    behaviour is to use the file's title from its front matter or file
    name.  Thanks to Charanjit Singh for the original contribution,
    which was done as part of pull request 109 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/109>.  A subsequent
    tweak was implemented in pull request 110, following a discussion
    with me: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/110>.

    Charanjit's contribution is below the ~15 line threshold and thus
    does not require copyright assignment to the Free Software
    Foundation.

-   The renaming operations are now aware of the underlying version
    control system and will use the appropriate command when a VCS is
    available.  In practice, renaming a file under, say, Git will
    register it as a "rename" instead of two separate actions of
    deletion and addition.

    Thanks to Florian for the patch.  It was discussed on the mailing
    list and then underwent some changes:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C166547153518.8.941129310186454444.68125516@aboulafia.org%3E>.

-   The `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter` no longer fails to carry
    out its intended task when the front matter has no keywords.  If no
    keywords are available, this is interpreted as a request to remove
    the KEYWORDS component of the file name.  This was always
    technically possible and could be achieved with various permutations
    of the user option `denote-prompts` (as explained in its doc string
    or the manual).  Denote only needs an identifier in the file name to
    establish unique links (although I strongly encourage you to stick
    to the standard file-naming scheme as it is informative, reliable,
    and can work even if you access your data without Emacs).


## For more advanced use-cases

-   The variable `denote-file-types` has been tweaked to respond
    directly to changes in its value done with `setq`.  Thanks to Noboru
    Ota for the patch: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C86k05gsqsg.fsf%40nobiot.com%3E>.

    Noboru has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   The `:front-matter` property of the `denote-file-types` now accepts
    a nil value.  Denote could always work without front matter, but
    this was not implemented flexibly in the `denote-file-types`.
    Thanks to Noboru Ota (nobiot) for pointing this out on the mailing
    list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C86k05gsqsg.fsf%40nobiot.com%3E>.

-   The `denote-file-prompt` function now reads an optional
    `INITIAL-TEXT` argument.  This is a string that prepopulates the
    minibuffer.  It is useful for custom commands the user may have
    where, for example, there is a need to automatically filter to
    entries matching `_journal`.  Thanks to Alan Schmitt for suggesting
    the idea: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87pmf676n1.fsf@m4x.org%3E>.

-   The `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter` accepts an optional
    `AUTO-CONFIRM` argument.  It can either be passed interactively or
    via Lisp.  The doc string (or the manual) explains the details.
    Thanks to Elias Storms for the initial patch:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm2a667aeku.fsf%40gmail.com%3E>.

-   The `denote-prompt-for-date-return-id` function uses the familiar
    `denote-date-prompt` and returns the appropriate identifier.  It is
    used internally by some of our function, but we also provide it for
    anyone who wants to write their own custom code.

-   The `denote-retrieve-or-create-file-identifier` function reads and
    option `DATE` argument to its mandatory `FILE` argument.  If `FILE`
    does not have an identifier and optional `DATE` is non-nil, the
    function invokes the `denote-prompt-for-date-return-id`, as
    mentioned above.

-   The `denote-rename-file` command accepts an optional `DATE`
    argument.  It functionally does what is described right above, with
    the exception that this is for an interactive function (a
    "command").  Read the detailed doc string or the manual for
    everything that pertains to this powerful command.

    Thanks to Florian for suggesting the idea on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C166521684647.7.5483179875879361874.67576870%40aboulafia.org%3E>.

-   The `denote-directory-text-only-files` function filters the
    `denote-directory-files` to only return a list of text files.  This
    leaves out, say, mp3 files.  The function is used internally, though
    it may also prove useful in custom user code.


## Miscellaneous refinements

-   Implemented a `revert-buffer-function` for the backlinks' buffer,
    which is produced by the command `denote-link-backlinks`.  This
    revert function is what the `g` key invokes with the default key
    bindings (the command is `revert-buffer`).  It produces the buffer
    anew, updating the list of backlinks accordingly.

-   Documented how to speed up the creation of the backlinks' buffer.
    As this depends on the built-in `xref` library, the change is done
    by specifying the value of the user option `xref-search-program`
    in Emacs 28 or higher.  For example:

    ```elisp
    (setq xref-search-program 'ripgrep)
    ```

    For something more elaborate:

    ```elisp
    ;; Prefer ripgrep, then ugrep, and fall back to regular grep.
    (setq xref-search-program
          (cond
           ((or (executable-find "ripgrep")
                (executable-find "rg"))
            'ripgrep)
           ((executable-find "ugrep")
            'ugrep)
           (t
            'grep)))
    ```

-   Removed some minor duplication of effort in how the buttonisation of
    links is done (what makes them clickable).

-   Made refinements to the definition of functions such as
    `denote-link-add-links`.  There should be no noticeable change for
    users, though this shows we care about code quality.

-   With Eshel Yaron, we tried to remove the empty indices for functions
    and variables from the HTML version of the manual.  These indices
    are useful in the Info version, which can be accessed directly from
    Emacs when the `denote` package is installed (for example, evaluate
    `(info "(denote) Top")`), but they do not work with HTML.  Alas,
    what we tried to do did not work.  Maybe Org has a way to control
    what is exported where.  We shall see.  At any rate, thanks to Eshel
    for the effort: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/36028>.

-   All code that integrates the `denote:` custom hyperlink type with
    Org's link facility is now assigned `autoload` cookies.  These are
    done to ensure that `denote` is loaded and is available in cases
    where Org needs to access a `denote:` link at some early stage
    (e.g. at startup before using Denote).  Thanks to Sven Seebeck for
    reporting the problem: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87r0zovwix.fsf%40svenseebeck.me%3E>.
    Although Sven could not reproduce a bug reliably, I believe
    this prevents such an eventuality.

-   Expanded or otherwise updated the manual to account for all of the
    above, where appropriate.
