---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 0.10.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Extremely Fatigued of Themes Having Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## New user option for highlighted region

The `ef-themes-region` accepts a list of symbols that affect how the
region looks.  The manual or the variable's doc string describe the
technicalities.  Here is a sample:

    (setq ef-themes-region '(intense no-extend))

Remember that changes to theme user options must be done before
loading a theme.  For any subsequent customisation, a theme re-load is
required.

## The `ef-themes-headings` now affects the Org agenda

Before, the Org agenda headings would inherit from the generic heading
levels 0 and 1.  This had undesired effects, as users often need a
taller typeface for prose (e.g. regular Org files), though not
necessarily for viewing their already well-structured Org agenda.

The `ef-themes-headings` can now control the Org agenda date and
structure headings directly.  A complete example:

    (setq ef-themes-headings ; read the manual's entry or the doc string
          '((0 . (variable-pitch light 1.9))
            (1 . (variable-pitch light 1.8))
            (2 . (variable-pitch light 1.7))
            (3 . (variable-pitch semilight 1.6))
            (4 . (variable-pitch semilight 1.5))
            (5 . (variable-pitch regular 1.4))
            (6 . (variable-pitch regular 1.3))
            (7 . (variable-pitch 1.2))    ; absence of weight means `bold'
            (agenda-date . (semilight 1.5))
            (agenda-structure . (variable-pitch light 1.9))
            (t . (variable-pitch 1.1))))

In Org agenda buffers, the "structure" is the type of heading that
describes the current block of content.  In the generic agenda, it is
the first line, which reads something like `Week-agenda (W48):`.

Note that Org re-uses heading levels past 8.  This is not the theme's
work, so heading 9 looks the same as 1.  Check the user options
`org-level-faces`, `org-n-level-faces` for ways to change this.


## Support for more packages

-   cider
-   clojure-mode
-   eglot
-   perspective.  Thanks to Walheimat for the contribution.  This was
    done in pull request 18 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/pull/18>.  The change is
    below the ~15 line limit.  It does not require copyright assignment
    to the Free Software Foundation.
-   tree-sitter


## Lots of small tweaks to colour values

All themes have enjoyed attention to their details.  The general idea
is that some colours are fine-tuned to look better in their context.
In most cases, the change is subtle and can only be noticed when
comparing samples side-by-side.  Some more noticeable effects:

-   All neutral backgrounds that are used for elements such as the
    `tab-bar-mode`, the `header-line`, the mode lines, and the like, are
    all amplified.  They should now be easier to discern, especially on
    monitors with inaccurate reproduction of grey values.

-   The `match` face, which is used by Grep, Occur, and related, now
    uses a coloured background instead of a neutral grey.  This makes it
    easier to stand out.  The choice of colour is consistent with the
    backgrounds used by Isearch for the current and other matches: they
    do not clash (e.g. a user may perform a search inside an Occur
    buffer).

-   The `M-x calendar` weekdays and weekends are rendered in distinct
    colours.  Weekends stand out the same way they do in physical
    calendars and common apps.

-   The Org agenda date headings follow the same style as those of the
    `M-x calendar`.  THIS IS EXPERIMENTAL in the hope of receiving
    feedback about weekends standing out.  If the community thinks the
    effect is inappropriate, I will revert this change or, anyhow,
    adapt accordingly.  Though please give it a fair chance.

-   Magit diff hunk headings now use more appropriate shades of grey.
    The active/current diff hunk heading stands out better, while
    inactive hunk headings are distinguishable from the diff's context.

-   Git/VC commit hashes have a tinted foreground instead of a dim grey.
    They are thus easier to spot in various contexts, such as Magit
    rebase operations and `M-x vc-print-root-log`.

-   The yellow used for strings in the `ef-cherie` theme is now a bit
    more gold.  This helps strings stand out when placed beside
    functions.

-   The `ef-night` heading 4 no longer uses the same red as that of the
    `TODO` Org keyword.  The previous design was a mistake on my part.
    Heading levels 6 and 8 are tweaked accordingly.

-   The heading level 6 of `ef-summer` and `ef-spring` are also
    disambiguated from Org's `TODO`, while retaining their character.


## Miscellaneous

-   Refined various faces in the interest of consistency and usability.
-   Applied the new theme properties that Emacs 29 can read.  These tell
    Emacs whether the theme is light or dark and the family it belongs
    to.
-   Clarified some statements in the manual and/or the various doc
    strings in the source code.
