---
title: 'Modus themes 2.3.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published version `2.3.0` of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The release notes
are reproduced below.  For any questions, feel welcome to [contact
me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will now prepare the patch for emacs.git which will then trickle down
to GNU ELPA (the `modus-themes` is a `:core` package).  Thank you for
your patience!

* * *

## Modus themes version 2.3.0

By Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com> on 2022-04-01

This entry documents the changes made to the project since the
publication of version 2.2.0 on 2022-02-23.  It spans more than 70
commits.

To access the URL of the manual visit:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>.  Or read it in the Emacs
Info reader by evaluating:

    (info "(modus-themes) Top")

The `modus-operandi` and `modus-vivendi` themes are built into Emacs-28
(next stable release) or later, and are available on GNU ELPA as well as
other archives.  Emacs-28 ships version 1.6.0, while the current
`master` branch (i.e. Emacs-29) and, by extension, GNU ELPA include the
latest tagged release.


### Customisation options

* The `modus-themes-completions` now accepts a `text-also` property for
  the `selection` key.  This has the effect of colourising the current
  line's text.  Whereas the default does not change the text colour,
  re-using whatever underlying colours are available.  Consult the doc
  string of this user option, as it provides for fine-grained control of
  how completion UIs may look.  Thanks to Morgan Willcock whose feedback
  in issue 278 inspired me to add the `text-also` property:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/278>.

* The `modus-themes-box-buttons` now accepts an `all-buttons` property.
  It applies whatever other style is used for the boxed buttons to the
  generic `widget.el`.  By default, the faces of `widget.el` do not look
  like graphical buttons: they have a bold weight and a foreground
  colour instead.  Examples where those are used are the Notmuch "hello"
  buffer and the main view of the `elfeed-summary` package.  Thanks to
  Daniel Mendler, Rudolf Adamkovič, and Tony Zorman for their feedback
  in issue 296: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/296>.

* The `modus-themes-intense-mouseovers` is a boolean user option which
  makes mouse hover effects more intense when set to a non-nil value.
  By default, mouseovers use a cyan background value.  This changes it
  to a more prominent blue.  Thanks to John Haman for the feedback in
  issue 290: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/290>.

* The user options `modus-themes-box-buttons`, `modus-themes-mode-line`,
  `modus-themes-org-agenda`, and `modus-themes-headings` can now read a
  number value as a cons cell.  The old method of a plain number
  continues to work.  This makes it possible to be more descriptive on
  what a given value signifies.  Each doc string describes the
  technicalities.  Here are samples that yield identical results:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-mode-line '(accented 0.9 borderless 2))
  (setq modus-themes-mode-line '(accented (heigh 0.9) borderless (padding 2)))
  ```

  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for proposing this idea in issue 282:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/282#note_842257619>


### Attempted bug fix for byte compiled files

Quoting from the git log:

    commit f067d2ef39c22174b95584f2cba7942aaf03bcca
    Author: Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com>
    Date:   Thu Mar 3 06:52:31 2022 +0200

        Reify themes with eval-and-compile

        This is an attempt to fix a bug that has existed since version 1.2.0 of
        the themes or even earlier.

        The bug is about a mismatch between compiled code and runtime
        dependencies.  The runtime expects the current version while the
        compiled code only furnishes an outdated one, thus resulting in an
        error.  This only happens when:

        1. Private functions change to accept more/fewer arguments.
        2. Variables change their acceptable value (e.g. from symbol to list).
        3. The user is installing the package via the package.el mechanism which
           takes care of byte compilation (though anything that mimics
           package.el should exhibit the same behaviour).

        My understanding is that the cause was the limited scope of the
        'eval-and-compile' we had before: it would run the 'require' also at
        compile time, whereas the 'modus-themes-theme' macro, which reifies the
        actual theme, would only be evaluated at runtime.  Hence the mismatch as
        'require' would read the already installed byte code while the macro
        would expect newer forms.

        Wrapping everything in the 'eval-and-compile' should address this
        problem.  Hopefully it will not engender new ones...

        * * *

        The latest reports about this bug:

        * GitLab issue 287 with Mark Bestley and Daniel Mendler:
          <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/287>.

        * GitHub issue 22 with Rytis Paškauskas:
          <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/22>.

     doc/modus-themes.info   | 30 +++++++++++++++---------------
     doc/modus-themes.org    | 15 ++++++++-------
     modus-operandi-theme.el | 10 +++++-----
     modus-vivendi-theme.el  | 10 +++++-----
     4 files changed, 33 insertions(+), 32 deletions(-)

After nearly one month, no problem has been observed as a result of this
change.


### Newly supported packages

These are added to the already comprehensive coverage we guarantee.

Directly supported:

* devdocs.  Thanks to Augusto Stoffel, its developer, for the feedback
  which was sent via email.

* mini-modeline.  Thanks to Julio C. Villasante for the feedback in
  issue 24 over at the GitHub mirror:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/24>.

Indirectly supported (they use faces that we already cover):

* elfeed-summary
* undo-hl


### Changes to supported faces or packages

* Improved the colours used by `avy` to always guarantee constrast in
  hueness between side-by-side characters with a variety of user
  settings.  I tried various styles, such as:
  
  ```elisp
  (setq avy-style 'pre)
  (setq avy-style 'at-full)
  ```

  For the sake of completeness, I also ran tests by modifying the
  `avy-lead-faces` (which is a `defconst`, not a `defcustom`):

  ```elisp
  (setq avy-lead-faces
        '(avy-lead-face
          avy-lead-face-0
          avy-lead-face-2
          avy-lead-face
          avy-lead-face-0
          avy-lead-face-2))

  (setq avy-lead-faces
        '(avy-lead-face
          avy-lead-face-1
          avy-lead-face-1
          avy-lead-face-1
          avy-lead-face-1))

  (setq avy-lead-faces
        '(avy-lead-face
          avy-lead-face-2
          avy-lead-face-2
          avy-lead-face-2
          avy-lead-face-2))
  ```

* Updated the `vertico-quick` faces to keep them aligned with the new
  Avy styles.  Thanks to Daniel Mendler (Vertico's developer) for the
  reminder:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/commit/404a9658196debdde95a51148fc62c5b2faccfb9#note_856454659>.

* Applied warmer though still not saturated colours for Org clocking
  overlays.  The previous style could be mistaken for a mouse highlight
  or the highlighted line if `modus-themes-hl-line` included the
  properties `intense` and `accented`.  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for
  the feedback in issue 293:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/293>.

* Broadened coverage of the built-in `shr.el` library to include the new
  `shr-code` face (Emacs 29).

* Expanded support for the `embark` package by covering its new
  `embark-collect-marked` face.  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for the
  feedback in issue 299:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/299>.

* Made the `fill-column-indicator` a contiguous line.  It was a dashed
  line before, per the Emacs defaults, which led to awkward results
  depending on the font family and value of `line-spacing`.  Thanks to
  Daniel Mendler for the feedback in issue 297:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/297>.

* Added explicit support for the built-in `separator-line` face in order
  to refine its presentation.  This is present in `M-x shortdoc` buffers
  (Emacs 28).  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for the feedback in issue 297:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/297>.

* Applied explicit styling to the generic `underline` face in order to
  ensure its consistent colouration.  The problem before was that an
  underline that spanned text with distinct colours would inherit the
  colour of the affected character.  A uniform presentation makes
  everything easier to read.

* The `ement.el` Matrix client now uses a subtle background for username
  mentions and/or quoted text.  This is consistent with how other Matrix
  clients style such constructs.  Thanks to Adam Porter (aka
  "alphapapa"), the developer of ement.el, for explaining the
  technicalities and providing the relevant feedback in issue 25 over at
  the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/25>.

* Enforced consistency between `icomplete` and `ido`.  The first match
  was coloured differently in `ido-mode` by mistake.  Thanks to Morgan
  Willcock for the feedback in issue 278:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/278>.

* Used the main foreground for Company's tooltip.  This is how it should
  have been.  Corfu is designed that way as well.  Thanks to user okamsn
  for the feedback in issue 278:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/278>.

* Corrected an omission whereby the AUCTeX verbatim face was not
  consistent with other such faces.  Now it too is governed by the user
  option `modus-themes-markup`.

* Fixed the `centaur-tabs` invalid background message.  Thanks to
  Lennart C. Karssen for reporting the bug in issue 288:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/288>.  Note,
  however, that the problem is due to some decisions made upstream.  My
  patch has not been merged yet (open since 2022-02-24):
  <https://github.com/ema2159/centaur-tabs/pull/179>.  Given this
  opportunity, always anticipate that faces may `:inherit` from others
  and thus functions like `face-background` might return an undesirable
  nil value if used without a fallback.


### Miscellaneous

* Made the `modus-themes--current-theme` return the first Modus theme
  instead of the `car` of `custom-enabled-themes`.  This makes the
  themes work at all times even when the user has multiple of them
  enabled.  Thanks to Pierre Téchoueyres for the patch, which was sent
  via email with regard to Emacs bug#54598:
  <https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/bugreport.cgi?bug=54598>.

* Implemented compile-time requirement for built-in libraries to be sure
  that the themes work in all cases.  Thanks to Antonio Hernández Blas
  for reporting in issue 292 the bug with the old design that assumed
  the `cl-lib` and `subr-x` as already loaded:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/292>.

* Wrote in the manual how to achieve a monochrome style (with
  permutations) for code syntax highlighting.  Thanks to Augusto Stoffel
  for sharing the idea via an email exchange (this information is
  divulged with permission).

* Clarified some statements in the manual's section about the nuances in
  "enabling" and "loading" a theme.

* Documented how the applicable palette affects the outer boundaries of
  the colour range that terminal emulators set when Emacs is ran without
  a GUI.  Here "the palette" refers to the relevant 16 ANSI escape
  sequences (terminal colours 0 through 15).  For the sake of
  convenience, the node includes ready-to-use palettes for XTerm, which
  can be adapted to other terminal emulators.  This entry complements an
  existing one on improving the colour accuracy in terminal emulators.

* Used American English constructions in a few places such as "color"
  instead of "colour" as that is what core Emacs expects (and the themes
  are part of emacs.git).

* Updated the description of the themes to be more user-friendly.
  Instead of "Highly accessible themes (WCAG AAA)" we now have "Elegant,
  highly legible and customizable themes".  Nothing changes in terms of
  substance.  Thanks to Jorge Morais for the feedback.

* Clarified that the version of the themes which is built into Emacs
  does not use `require`.  It is in response to this thread:
  <https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/help-gnu-emacs/2022-03/msg00049.html>.
  Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for bringing the issue to my attention.

* Improved the code samples that show how to set up the package.

* Wrote the correct symbols for some obsoletion forms.

Thanks once again to everyone involved!
