---
title: 'Modus themes 2.1.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published version `2.1.0` of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The release notes
are reproduced below.  For any questions, feel welcome to [contact
me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will now take a break and then go for a brisk walk (writing a massive
changelog is no mean task).  Once I return, I will prepare the patch for
the `master` branch on emacs.git (currently this corresponds to Emacs
version 29).  The `modus-themes` package in GNU ELPA is a `:core`
package meaning that it fetches its contents from emacs.git, so expect
an update to trickle down shortly after my patch is merged.

* * *

## Modus themes version 2.1.0

By Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com> on 2022-02-17

The present entry records the changes made to the project since the
publication of version 2.0.0 on 2021-12-24.  There have been more than
110 commits in the meantime (and this log is close to 5000 words).

All modifications of colour combinations mentioned herein are made in
accordance with the primary accessibility objective of the themes for a
minimum contrast ratio of 7:1 between background and foreground values
in their given combination (the WCAG AAA standard for relative colour
luminance).  Edits also account for colour-coding that is optimised for
the needs of users with red-green colour deficiency (deuteranopia).

To access the URL of the manual visit this web page:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>.  Or read it in the Emacs
Info reader by evaluating this form:

    (info "(modus-themes) Top")

The 'modus-operandi' and 'modus-vivendi' themes are built into Emacs-28
(next stable release) or later, and are available on GNU ELPA as well as
other archives.  Emacs-28 ships version 1.6.0, while the current
'master' branch (i.e. Emacs-29) and, by extension, GNU ELPA include the
latest tagged release.


### Commands

The following produce a buffer that previews the colour palette of the
given theme (`modus-operandi` or `modus-vivendi`).

* `modus-themes-list-colors` prompts for a theme before producing the
  preview.

* `modus-themes-list-colors-current` uses the current Modus theme.

These commands are useful to anyone who wants to reference a named
colour from the themes or copy a colour value, such as for the purposes
of user-level customisation (as documented at length in the manual
across several use-cases and with the inclusion of custom code).

The commands are not bound to any key.


### Customisation options

* Implemented the `modus-themes-markup` variable, which supersedes the
  now-deprecated `modus-themes-intense-markup`.  The new user option
  accepts a list of properties (symbols).  It affects constructs such as
  Org's `=verbatim=`, `~code~`, and macro (with three pairs of braces).
  By default, when this user option is either nil or an empty list, the
  affected constructs only have a foreground colour (e.g. Org verbatim
  is magenta).  Properties that change this style are:

  1. `italic` for an added slant to the text.
  2. `bold` for a heavier weight.
  3. `background` to add a background colour.
  4. `intense` to amplify the colouration (especially of `background`).

  As with all user options which accept a list of properties, the order
  of the symbols is no significant.  In user configurations it may look
  like this:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-markup '(background intense bold))
  ```

  [ Read the manual for bold and italic fonts.  We do not hardcode a
    :weight or :slant, instead giving the user the option to set their
    own values.  The defaults are what you would normally expect from
    "bold" and "italic". ]

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for reporting some problems with the old
  design in issue 274:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/274>.

* Added the `modus-themes-box-buttons` which affects all pseudo
  graphical buttons, such as those found in Custom UI buffers or EWW web
  pages which include search forms and the like.  The variable accepts a
  list of properties as its value.  By default (nil or empty list),
  buttons have a grey background and the familiar 3D effect.  Valid
  properties are:

  1. `flat` to remove the 3D effect.
  2. `accented` to shift the colouration away from grey.
  3. `faint` to reduce the overall colouration (e.g. grey becomes white).
  4. `variable-pitch` to apply a proportionately spaced font.
  5. `underline` to draw a line instead of applying a 3D or flat box
     (particularly useful for those who use Emacs in a terminal emulator).
  6. The symbol of a font weight, such as `bold`, `semibold`, `light` or
     any one among those included in the `modus-themes-weights` constant
     (the underlying font family has to support the given weight).
  7. A number, expressed as a floating point (e.g. 0.9), which adjusts
     the height of the button’s text to that many times the base font
     size.  The default height is the same as 1.0, though it need not be
     explicitly stated.

  The order in which those symbols appear in the list is not
  significant.  If `underline` and `flat` are both specified, the former
  takes precedence.  In user init files the form may look like this:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-box-buttons '(variable-pitch flat semilight 0.9))
  ```

  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for suggesting this user option and providing
  the relevant feedback in issue 282:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/282>.

* Expanded the `modus-themes-mail-citations` with an `intense` variant.
  For example:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-mail-citations 'intense)
  ```

  The default is a moderately coloured style.  Other variants include
  `faint` for subtle colouration and `monochrome` for an all-grey look.

* Reviewed the `modus-themes-completion` option and harmonised all the
  face specifications it governs.  The variable now accepts a fourth
  stylistic variant in `super-opinionated`: it is like the `opinionated`
  one though some details are even more pronounced.  Other noteworthy
  items:

  [ Remember to read the doc string of `modus-themes-completions`, which
    explains the grouping of the completion UIs. ]

  - The `(setq modus-themes-completions 'moderate)` style is more-or-less
    the same across all completion UIs.  The highlight applied to the
    current line is a bespoke shade of blue, the characters are less
    saturated than before and their hues are different, though the
    overall effect should still feel "sufficiently colourful, but not
    overdone".

  - The `(setq modus-themes-completions nil)` is the same as before.
    However:

      - The current line in Ivy now uses a shade of blue that is
        specific to completion UIs instead of an intense cyan
        background.  This is for theme-wide consistency.

      - Helm's current line has the same bespoke blue for its current
        line instead of another shade of blue it was using before.

  - The `(setq modus-themes-completions 'opinionated)` should be the same
    as before, notwithstanding the aforementioned tweaks to Ivy/Helm.

  - The `(setq modus-themes-completions 'super-opinionated)` for
    Icomplete, Vertico, Selectrum, Mct uses the same blue for the
    current line as is the default of Ivy and Helm.

  Miscellaneous:

  - The relevant private helper functions were rewritten.

  - We declare a few faces to help streamline certain styles.

  - Ivy action keys now inherit from `modus-themes-key-binding`.  We
    generally try to make all keys look the same, except when that would
    be detrimental to the usability of the given context/interface.

  - Some Ivy faces are simplified or otherwise tweaked to fit in with
    the rest of the theme.

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the feedback about Vertico in issues
  214 and 278 which prompted me to review all completion UIs:

  - <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/214>
  - <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/278>

* Adjusted the applicable hues in some `modus-themes-syntax` variants.  In
  particular:

  - The strings' hue has more hints of blue when `modus-themes-syntax`
    includes the `green-strings` property.  Such as:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(green-strings))
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(alt-syntax green-strings))
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(alt-syntax green-strings faint))
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(alt-syntax green-strings faint yellow-comments))
  ```

  - Strings are more orange/yellow than red when `modus-themes-syntax`
    includes the `alt-syntax` property but NOT the `green-strings`.  For
    example:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(alt-syntax))
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(alt-syntax yellow-comments))
  (setq modus-themes-syntax '(alt-syntax yellow-comments faint))
  ```

  - Backslashes for regexp constructs are coloured appropriately to look
    distinct from the rest of the string and from the escaped construct in
    all cases.

* Removed background colours from the the default style of Org block
  delimiters.

  As I explained in Emacs bug#52587,[1] Org has code that overrides
  themes which prefer not to extend the block delimiter faces to the
  edge of the window (as we would like to do by default).  This
  practically means that we cannot have backgrounds for those lines and
  keep them limited to the stretch of area covered by their text.

  As such, the default for Org block delimiter lines now is a gray
  foreground with no distinct background colour.  The user option
  `modus-themes-org-blocks` provides "blocky" alternatives that use
  background colours---those extend to the edge of the window.

  [1] <https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/bugreport.cgi?bug=52587#46>

* Deleted the compatibility layer for all user options that used to
  accept symbols in the past but now expect a list of symbols.  The
  manual contains a snippet with all customisation options for those who
  do not want to read all the relevant doc strings.  Evaluate this:

  ```
  (info "(modus-themes) Customization Options")
  ```

  Or visit: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:bf1c82f2-46c7-4eb2-ad00-dd11fdd8b53f>.

  The original plan was to remove those during the transition to version
  2.0.0 (about a month ago) though I changed my mind thinking they would
  not pose a longer-term problem.

  New information by Mark Bestley in issue 272 shows that this kind of
  complexity can lead to errors:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/272#note_826725412>.

  So it is better to keep things simple and ask users to configure all
  user options based on the up-to-date documentation.

  Also thanks to Saša Janiška for the feedback in issue 272.


### New packages, faces, or face groups

* all-the-icons-dired.

* all-the-icons-ibuffer.

* `child-frame-border` face (Emacs 28).

* `citar` package.  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the feedback in issue
  280: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/280>.

* `elisp-shorthand-font-lock-face` (Emacs 29).  Read the manual by
  evaluating:

  ```
  (info "(elisp) Shorthands")
  ```

* `ement` (ement.el) Matrix client, though it is not listed in any
  archive yet: <https://github.com/alphapapa/ement.el>.

  Thanks to Samuel Culpepper for the feedback in issue 279:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/279>.

  Also check the Ement issue tracker on the matter:
  <https://github.com/alphapapa/ement.el/issues/53>.

* `mct` package.

* `menu` face (built-in) which is used in the menu-bar when Emacs runs
  without a graphical toolkit.

* `pgtk-im-0` face (Emacs 29).  This is shown as a single-character-long
  block when you type the Compose key followed by the composable
  characters.

* `pyim` (an input method for CJK characters).  Thanks to Yuanchen Xie for
  the contribution in merge request 57:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/57>.
  The patch is small and is thus excluded from the requirement for
  copyright assignment to the FSF (remember that the themes are built
  into Emacs and any major contribution needs such copyright
  assignment---read the relevant entry in the themes' manual).

* `slime` and `sly` packages.  Thanks to John Haman for the feedback
  which was done via email due to some problems with the web UI on
  GitLab (this information is shared with permission).  Please note that
  I am not familiar with Common Lisp and could not test these
  thoroughly.  Any mistakes or omissions are my own.

  Concerning the web UI, there is a fully functional mirror of the
  themes on GitHub, while email is always an option.  Use whatever works
  for you to report an issue or send a patch.

* `textsec` package (Emacs 29).

#### New indirectly supported packages

These inherit from base faces and look good enough already or use
appropriate colours from the Modus themes:

* dtache
* org-remark


### Changes to supported faces or face groups

* Stopped making key bindings look like boxes.  We revert to the old
  style we were using before the introduction of the `help-key-binding`
  face (Emacs 28).

  By default Emacs 28 or higher will render all key bindings it
  identifies with a box around them.  The idea is to make them look like
  keys on a keyboard, which I never really liked because without
  generous padding you get a very tight space between the character and
  the box's borders which can look weird at small point sizes (Emacs
  faces do not have padding in the same way CSS does).

  I tried following the default style for a few months and have concluded
  that it is not good enough for our purposes (my preferences
  notwithstanding):

  - The box attribute does not work in terminal emulators.  This means
    that keys only get a subtle grey background and the default
    foreground, which can be hard to make them stand out from their
    surrounding text if the font height is small and/or the keybinding is
    short (e.g. a single character).

  - The box and grey background combination limits our options when we
    need to colour-code different types of keys.  For example, the
    `which-key` package can show TAB as T and applies to it a different
    face to make the distinction obvious.  In that case, the presence of
    the tight box makes the use of a bold weight inappropriate: the
    character and the box's borders seem to overlap.  While the grey
    background limits our choice of colour as, for instance, yellow
    never looks good against it.  Same principle for interfaces that can
    have colour-coded keys like `transient` and `hydra`, where we lose
    much-needed flexibility.

* Adjusted the brightness of the `which-key-special-key-face`.  This is
  the face that applies to special keys.  For example:

  ```elisp
  (setq which-key-special-keys '("SPC" "TAB" "RET" "ESC" "DEL"))
  ```

* Made `transient` faces which are supposed to be de-emphasise certain
  elements inherit the `shadow` face.  This is an implicit customisation
  option, as it allows the user to adjust the foreground value of all
  "less important" constructs simply by changing the `shadow` face.

* Covered the `transient-purple` face (these are like the colour-coding
  of `hydra`).

* Tweaked the `transient-argument` and `transient-value` faces to make
  things look a bit more consistent with the other transient faces.
  This is to avoid potential conflicts with the highlighted key
  bindings, especially when transient uses hydra-style colour-coded
  keys.

* Applied the same metaphors for key bindings to `marginalia-key`
  (`marginalia` package) and `embark-keybinding` (`embark` package).
  They inherit the `modus-themes-key-binding` when possible.  The only
  exception is with `(setq modus-themes-completions nil)` where conflicts
  may arise between the key's style and matching characters of the
  ongoing completion session.

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for pointing out the inconsistency in issue
  278: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/278>.

* Refrained from treating LaTeX sections as headings.  This is because
  unlike Org/Outline/Markdown Latex is basically source code, so the
  sectioning does not work the same way it does for those lightweight
  markup/outlining modes.

  Furthermore, font-latex.el defines `font-latex-fontify-sectioning`
  which can be used to control the scale of those sections.  It makes
  sense for the themes to not interfere with that design and just allow
  users to customise things uniformly regardless of the active theme.

  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for the detailed feedback in issue 265:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/265>.

* Reviewed the hues of `all-the-icons` and related packages.

* Applied the correct style to `info-menu-header`, meaning that it now
  only uses a bold weight as it is not a real heading, instead of being
  affected by the user option `modus-themes-headings`.

* Included new `telega-entity-type-spoiler` face.  Thanks to bit9tream
  for informing me about it in issue 271:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/271>.  The
  conclusion:

  >Tricky though perhaps dull
  >
  >I understand this is not an interesting topic and it probably is
  >too difficult to relate to the various data points without
  >visualising them and comparing the before and after
  >states. Furthermore, data can be deceptive and I have always
  >maintained that theme development stands at the intersection of
  >science and art (at least for the purposes of conforming with the
  >rigorous accessibility standards of the Modus themes).
  >
  >That granted, I wanted to shed light on the “behind the scenes”
  >work that is not immediately obvious when one checks a diff that
  >introduces some seemingly trivial tweaks like `#49d239` -> `#49c029`
  >or `#7fcfff` -> `#8fbfff`.

* Tweaked the hues of all graph colours, which are used in the
  `org-habit` table.  The changes are subtle and should improve the
  overall usability of the graph.  For the technicalities, read:
  <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-01-02-review-modus-themes-org-habit-colours/>.

  Also thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for reporting the problem with white
  text on yellow background in issue 270:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/270>.

* Styled the `markdown-highlighting-face`.  This is the face used for
  text in between double equals signs when the user option
  `markdown-enable-highlighting-syntax` is non-nil.

* Amplified the overall colouration of Eldoc's current argument.  It is
  a yellow foreground with a tinted background.  The blue foreground
  which was applied before could be hard to tell apart in some cases,
  especially because it is a common colour that is used elsewhere in the
  themes.  Whereas the warmer hues are easier to discern, especially
  while relying only on peripheral vision.

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the feedback in issue 275:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/275>.

* Instructed Geiser to use the same style for its argument as Eldoc
  (edited the faces `geiser-font-lock-autodoc-current-arg` and
  `geiser-font-lock-autodoc-identifier`).

* Made the `keycast-key` face work when `modus-themes-mode-line` has a
  padding value (read the latter doc string or consult the manual).

* Refined the `magit` faces for bisect, reflog, sequence, and signature
  views.  They get a bold weight and, where appropriate, are made to
  comply with the `modus-theems-deueteranopia` option (meaning that
  greens turn into blues).

* Recoloured `elfeed` tags from a shade of cyan to magenta, in the
  interest of theme-wide consistency but also to make them easier to
  tell apart from the name of the feed.  Also updated the faces used in
  the header-line to look better in context.

* Removed the hardcoded `:slant italic` from the `italic` face, which is
  consistent with how we do not hardcode `:weight bold` in the `bold`
  face.

  Such a design allows users to configure those faces and have the
  desired slant/weight (and even font family) apply consistently
  throughout the theme.  Read the manual for further details:
  <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:2793a224-2109-4f61-a106-721c57c01375>.

  Thanks to user derek-upham for pointing out the inconsistency in issue
  21 over at the GitHub mirror:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/21>.

* Improved the styles that apply to compilation buffers and related.
  The overarching intent was to reduce the excess colouration, without
  upsetting expectations and affecting the overall presentation.

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the feedback in issue 277:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/277>.

  Note that compilation buffers apply an underline by default.  The
  manual explains how to change that:
  <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:420f5a33-c7a9-4112-9b04-eaf2cbad96bd>.

* Ensured a consistent style for the `highlight` face across all
  contexts (typically used for mouse hover effects).  The mode line has
  an exception when its style includes an accented background (per
  `modus-themes-mode-line`).

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the feedback in issue 214:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/214>.

* Changed the foreground of `mode-line-emphasis` from blue to purple, in
  order to avoid potential (albeit unlikely) confusion with other
  indicators.

* Desaturated the `man` and `woman` foreground value of the bold
  constructs and tweaked other faces to avoid potential inconsistencies.
  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for the feedback:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/commit/8080eb1c6c0020ba82e8abaa933d6686327bc616#note_841424489>.

* Removed certain exaggerations from widgets as seen in the Custom UI
  and EWW.  Specifically:

  - `widget-field` does not need to `:extend`, as that typically does
    not look good.

  - `custom-state` gets a warmer colour to convey its message more
    effectively.

  - `eww-form-text` no longer uses a `:box` because that breaks when the
    widget occupies more than one line.

  - `eww-form-textarea` can now inherit from `eww-form-text`.

  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for the feedback on the style of those faces in
  issue 284: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/284>.


### The manual

* Clarified the wording of `shr` fonts, which affect `eww`, `elfeed`,
  `ement`, and possibly others.

* Wrote section on custom Org emphasis faces.  It includes code samples.

* Answered a Frequently Asked Question on whether the Modus themes are
  "colour schemes"---they are not and it is important to understand why.

* Addressed another Frequently Asked Question about porting the themes
  to other platforms or editors.  Relevant blog posts which explain how
  complex the issue is and why porting requires the same attention to
  detail as this project:

  - <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-01-03-modus-themes-port-faq/>.
  - <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-01-23-base16-modus-themes/>.

* Improved the sample code in the section about the backdrop of PDF
  files while using `pdf-tools`.  Thanks to Utkarsh Singh for the patch,
  which was sent via email.

* Provided sample code on an alternative style for Ediff.

  There was a discussion with Philip Kaludercic in issue 273 about making
  this a defcustom: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/273>.

  I first entertained the notion and did set up a branch for testing
  purposes.  However, I ultimately decided that such a course of action
  would establish a bad precedent because then every conceivable stylistic
  tweak could, in principle, become a user option.  Furthermore, the
  potential defcustom would introduce too much complexity as Ediff would
  have to continue to behave as other diffs (per `modus-themes-diffs`) if
  the user did not want the alternative style.

  As such, documenting how a user can achieve this is the right choice.

* Fixed internal link in the manual.  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for
  reporting the problem in issue 277:
  <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/277>.


### Miscellaneous

* Covered workaround for improving the accuracy of colour reproduction
  in terminal emulators.  The results are still not as good as the
  graphical version of Emacs, though they are considerably better than
  before.  Thanks to gitrj95's issue 18 at the GitHub mirror, which
  prompted me to research this topic:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/18>.

* Helped report a bug in the PGTK build of Emacs where a new emacsclient
  window with the `modus-vivendi` face would not show the cursor:
  <https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/bugreport.cgi?bug=53073>.  Thanks to
  contributed to the discussion on issue 7 over at the GitHub mirror:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/7>

* Shifted the hue of the intense `hl-line` from a grey-cyan to a more
  vivid blue by reducing the relative contribution of the green channel
  of light.

  The change affects these styles:

  ```elisp
  (setq modus-themes-hl-line '(accented intense))
  (setq modus-themes-hl-line '(accented intense underline))
  ```

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for suggesting a more vivid colour in issue
  214: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/214>.

* Recalibrated the `modus-vivendi` named colour `bg-paren-match`.

  I wanted to increase its distance relative to the main background,
  just to be sure that it is easier to spot.  This is achieved by moving
  the hueness from the yellow to the magenta side of the spectrum.

  Overall, the change is subtle and has no major impact on the contrast
  ratio relative to the main background and foreground (we need to
  consider both due to the specifics of show-paren-mode (and related)).

  The results (#5f362f is the old, #6f3355 the new):

  ```
  |         | #000000 | #ffffff | #000000 | #ffffff |
  |---------+---------+---------+---------+---------|
  | #5f362f |    2.06 |   10.22 |   37904 |  333060 |
  | #6f3355 |    2.28 |    9.21 |   58282 |  291037 |
  ```

  The TBLFM formula for this table (org-mode notation):

  ```
  $2='(Λ $1 @1$2);%.2f :: $3='(Λ $1 @1$3);%.2f :: $4='(Δ $1 @1$4) :: $5='(Δ $1 @1$5)
  ```

  The Greek letters mean:

  ```elisp
  (defalias 'Λ #'modus-themes-contrast)
  (defalias 'Δ #'color-distance)
  ```

* Expanded the "special" subset of the palette with faint variants of
  the four backgrounds.  These are reserved for special circumstances,
  as the name implies.  Below are the contrast values (see
  `modus-themes-contrast`).

  ```
  Modus Operandi main accept colours against faint special backgrounds:

  |         | #f0f1ff | #ebf5eb | #fef2ea | #faeff9 |
  |---------+---------+---------+---------+---------|
  | #a60000 |    7.15 |    7.17 |    7.29 |    7.16 |
  | #972500 |    7.26 |    7.28 |    7.40 |    7.28 |
  | #a0132f |    7.13 |    7.15 |    7.27 |    7.14 |
  | #7f1010 |    9.44 |    9.47 |    9.63 |    9.47 |
  | #702f00 |    8.94 |    8.97 |    9.12 |    8.96 |
  | #7f002f |    9.64 |    9.67 |    9.83 |    9.66 |
  | #005e00 |    7.20 |    7.23 |    7.34 |    7.22 |
  | #315b00 |    7.13 |    7.15 |    7.27 |    7.15 |
  | #145c33 |    7.18 |    7.20 |    7.32 |    7.20 |
  | #104410 |   10.09 |   10.12 |   10.29 |   10.12 |
  | #30440f |    9.56 |    9.59 |    9.75 |    9.58 |
  | #0f443f |    9.76 |    9.79 |    9.96 |    9.79 |
  | #813e00 |    7.14 |    7.17 |    7.28 |    7.16 |
  | #70480f |    7.14 |    7.17 |    7.28 |    7.16 |
  | #863927 |    7.13 |    7.15 |    7.27 |    7.15 |
  | #5f4400 |    8.10 |    8.12 |    8.26 |    8.12 |
  | #5d5000 |    7.17 |    7.19 |    7.31 |    7.19 |
  | #5e3a20 |    8.91 |    8.94 |    9.09 |    8.93 |
  | #0031a9 |    9.31 |    9.34 |    9.49 |    9.33 |
  | #2544bb |    7.14 |    7.16 |    7.28 |    7.16 |
  | #0000c0 |   10.64 |   10.67 |   10.85 |   10.66 |
  | #003497 |    9.66 |    9.70 |    9.86 |    9.69 |
  | #0f3d8c |    9.06 |    9.09 |    9.24 |    9.09 |
  | #001087 |   13.15 |   13.20 |   13.42 |   13.19 |
  | #721045 |    9.99 |   10.02 |   10.19 |   10.01 |
  | #8f0075 |    7.72 |    7.75 |    7.88 |    7.74 |
  | #5317ac |    8.98 |    9.01 |    9.16 |    9.00 |
  | #752f50 |    8.22 |    8.25 |    8.38 |    8.24 |
  | #7b206f |    8.22 |    8.25 |    8.38 |    8.24 |
  | #55348e |    8.26 |    8.29 |    8.42 |    8.28 |
  | #00538b |    7.18 |    7.20 |    7.32 |    7.19 |
  | #30517f |    7.18 |    7.20 |    7.32 |    7.20 |
  | #005a5f |    7.13 |    7.15 |    7.27 |    7.15 |
  | #005077 |    7.76 |    7.79 |    7.91 |    7.78 |
  | #354f6f |    7.49 |    7.52 |    7.64 |    7.51 |
  | #125458 |    7.69 |    7.72 |    7.85 |    7.71 |

  Modus Vivendi main accept colours against faint special backgrounds:

  |         | #0e183a | #001f1a | #241613 | #251232 |
  |---------+---------+---------+---------+---------|
  | #ff8059 |    7.01 |    7.01 |    7.07 |    7.00 |
  | #ef8b50 |    7.01 |    7.00 |    7.07 |    7.00 |
  | #ff9077 |    7.85 |    7.85 |    7.93 |    7.85 |
  | #ffa0a0 |    8.91 |    8.91 |    9.00 |    8.91 |
  | #f5aa80 |    9.04 |    9.04 |    9.13 |    9.04 |
  | #ff9fbf |    9.06 |    9.05 |    9.14 |    9.05 |
  | #44bc44 |    7.04 |    7.04 |    7.11 |    7.04 |
  | #70b900 |    7.13 |    7.13 |    7.20 |    7.12 |
  | #00c06f |    7.24 |    7.24 |    7.31 |    7.24 |
  | #78bf78 |    7.87 |    7.86 |    7.94 |    7.86 |
  | #99b56f |    7.60 |    7.59 |    7.67 |    7.59 |
  | #88bf99 |    8.23 |    8.22 |    8.30 |    8.22 |
  | #d0bc00 |    8.98 |    8.98 |    9.07 |    8.98 |
  | #c0c530 |    9.31 |    9.31 |    9.40 |    9.30 |
  | #d3b55f |    8.71 |    8.71 |    8.79 |    8.71 |
  | #d2b580 |    8.81 |    8.80 |    8.89 |    8.80 |
  | #cabf77 |    9.28 |    9.27 |    9.36 |    9.27 |
  | #d0ba95 |    9.20 |    9.20 |    9.29 |    9.20 |
  | #2fafff |    7.18 |    7.18 |    7.25 |    7.18 |
  | #79a8ff |    7.32 |    7.32 |    7.39 |    7.31 |
  | #00bcff |    7.96 |    7.96 |    8.04 |    7.96 |
  | #82b0ec |    7.74 |    7.74 |    7.81 |    7.74 |
  | #a0acef |    7.97 |    7.96 |    8.04 |    7.96 |
  | #80b2f0 |    7.89 |    7.88 |    7.96 |    7.88 |
  | #feacd0 |    9.94 |    9.93 |   10.03 |    9.93 |
  | #f78fe7 |    8.29 |    8.29 |    8.37 |    8.29 |
  | #b6a0ff |    7.82 |    7.81 |    7.89 |    7.81 |
  | #e0b2d6 |    9.51 |    9.50 |    9.60 |    9.50 |
  | #ef9fe4 |    8.88 |    8.88 |    8.96 |    8.87 |
  | #cfa6ff |    8.72 |    8.71 |    8.80 |    8.71 |
  | #00d3d0 |    9.28 |    9.27 |    9.36 |    9.27 |
  | #4ae2f0 |   11.09 |   11.09 |   11.20 |   11.09 |
  | #6ae4b9 |   11.08 |   11.07 |   11.18 |   11.07 |
  | #90c4ed |    9.34 |    9.34 |    9.43 |    9.33 |
  | #a0bfdf |    9.10 |    9.09 |    9.18 |    9.09 |
  | #a4d0bb |   10.18 |   10.17 |   10.27 |   10.17 |
  ```

* Add docs on color overrides through blending.  Thanks to Alex Griffin
  for the contribution in issue 269 and the subsequent patch in merge
  request 56 (the patch is exempt from copyright assignment):

  - <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/269>.
  - <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/56>.

* Fixed typo in the `:group` value of some faces defined in
  modus-themes.el.  Thanks to Gustavo Barros for reporting it in issue
  266: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/266>

* Updated copyright statement in all .el files to use the same wording
  as all other files that are built into Emacs.

* Made all sorts of tweaks and refinements to doc strings and nodes in the
  manual.

Thanks again to everyone involved!  This has been yet another cycle of
intense work which further iterated on an already solid base.
