---
title: 'Emacs: logos version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my logos package for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `logos` package provides a simple approach to setting up a "focus
mode".  It uses the `page-delimiter` or the outline together with some
commands to move between pages whether narrowing is in effect or not.
It also provides some optional aesthetic tweaks which come into effect
when the buffer-local `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  The manual shows
how to extend the code to achieve the desired result.

[Watch the demo of the original version of
logos.el](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-11-emacs-logos-demo/)
(all my relevant videos since early 2022 use `logos`).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `logos`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/logos>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos>
+ Backronyms: `^L` Only Generates Ostensible Slides; Logos Optionally
  Goes through Outline Sections

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Revised the fallback condition of the user option
    `logos-outline-regexp-alist` (it comes into effect when the
    `logos-outlines-are-pages` is non-nil).
    
    The previous value did not account for the buffer-local values of
    `outline-regexp` or `page-delimiter`, nor did it adapt to any
    changes in their respective values.  Instead, it would capture
    whatever the value was at the time of the symbol's declaration.
    
    We remove the `t` condition altogether and instead handle the
    fallback value internally.  Logos will return the current
    buffer-local value of `outline-regexp` or `page-delimiter`, in this
    order of priority.
    
    Put simply, this has the same intent as before, but works properly.

-   Introduced a check to guard against a void `outline-regexp`.  The
    previous value would cause a problem if the `outline-regexp` had not
    been set yet.  In a typical Emacs session, even on 'emacs -Q', the
    `outline-regexp` is set in the scratch buffer, so we have a valid
    value at the outset.  However, when the user changes the
    `initial-buffer-choice` or opens Emacs directly for a given file,
    the `outline-regexp` can be void.
    
    Thanks to Xiaoduan for informing me about this error and for testing
    my code on how to fix it.  This was done via a private channel and
    is shared with permission.

-   Implemented the user option `logos-hide-cursor`.  It hides the
    cursor when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  Note that this user
    option is always buffer-local.  Use `setq-default` to set its
    default global value (same as with other user options that apply to
    `logos-focus-mode` (read the manual)).
    
    Thanks to Marcel Ventosa for suggesting the idea of hiding the
    cursor.  This was done via a private channel and is shared with
    permission.

-   Clarified the documentation of `logos-focus-mode-extra-functions`.
    It is intended for use by those who are prepared to write custom
    functions in the spirit of those already used in `logos.el` to
    affect the buffer when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.

-   Added the missing autoload cookie to `logos-focus-mode`.  This means
    that it shows up in the completion candidates of `M-x` even if the
    `logos` library has not been called via `require`.
