---
title: 'Emacs: mct version 0.5.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my mct package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Below are the release notes.  If you have no idea what `mct` is, it is a
thin layer of interactivity on top of the default completion interface,
which works best on Emacs 28 or higher (Emacs 27 is supported but lacks
the ability to show completions in a single column).  Watch the [video
demo of the initial release](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2021-10-22-emacs-mct-demo/).

* * *

This entry covers the changes made to the "Minibuffer and Completions in
Tandem" (`mct` package) since the release of version 0.4.0 on 2022-01-19.
There have been about 60 commits in the meantime.

For further details on the user-facing options covered herein, please
read the manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct>.  Or evaluate the
following expression if you already have `mct` installed:

    (info "(mct) Top")


## Customisation options


### Size of the Completions buffer

The user option `mct-completion-window-size` controls the maximum and
minimum height of the window where the `*Completions*` buffer is shown.
It accepts a cons cell in the form of `(MAX-HEIGHT . MIN-HEIGHT)`.  Valid
values are natural numbers (positive integers) or functions which return
such numbers.  The default is a combination of the two for the sake of
illustration:

    (setq mct-completion-window-size (cons #'mct--frame-height-fraction 1))

With this in place, mct will let the `*Completions*` grow up to 1/3 of the
frame's height (per the `mct--frame-height-fraction`).  When live
completion is performed (see the user option `mct-live-completion`), the
window will shrink to fit the candidates.

To make the `*Completions*` have a fixed height instead, simply set the
same number/function twice.

If set to nil, mct will simply not try to fit the Completions' buffer to
its window.

Thanks to Daniel Mendler for the feedback in issue 14:
<https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/mct/-/issues/14>.


### Passlist and blocklist accept completion categories

The user options `mct-completion-passlist` and `mct-completion-blocklist`
used to only match symbols of commands like `find-file`, whereas now they
can affect any completion category such as `file`, `kill-ring`, et cetera.

Sample code:

    ;; This is for commands or completion categories that should always pop
    ;; up the completions' buffer.  It circumvents the default method of
    ;; waiting for some user input (see `mct-minimum-input') before
    ;; displaying and updating the completions' buffer.
    (setq mct-completion-passlist
          '(;; Some commands
            Info-goto-node
            Info-index
            Info-menu
            vc-retrieve-tag
            ;; Some completion categories
            imenu
            file
            buffer
            kill-ring
            consult-location))

The manual provides a comprehensive list of known completion categories:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct#h:1f42c4e6-53c1-4e8a-81ef-deab70822fa4>.

Or evaluate:

    (info "(mct) Known completion categories")


### Persist live completion for dynamic completion tables

Quoting from the documentation of the `mct-persist-dynamic-completion`
user option:

> When non-nil, keep dynamic completion live.
> 
> Without any intervention from MCT, the default Emacs behavior for
> commands such as `find-file` or for a `file` completion category is to hide
> the `*Completions*` buffer after updating the list of candidates in a
> non-exiting fashion (e.g. select a directory and expect to continue
> typing the path).  This, however, runs contrary to the interaction model
> of MCT when it performs live completions, because the user expects the
> Completions' buffer to remain visible while typing out the path to the
> file.
> 
> When this user option is non-nil (the default) it makes all non-exiting
> commands keep the `*Completions*` visible when updating the list of
> candidates.
> 
> This applies to prompts in the `file` completion category whenever the
> user selects a candidate with `mct-choose-completion-no-exit`,
> `mct-edit-completion`, `minibuffer-complete`, `minibuffer-force-complete`
> (i.e. any command that does not exit the minibuffer).
> 
> The two exceptions are (i) when the current completion session runs a
> command or category that is blocked by the `mct-completion-blocklist` or
> (ii) the user option `mct-live-completion` is nil.
> 
> The underlying rationale:
> 
> Most completion commands present a flat list of candidates to choose
> from.  Picking a candidate concludes the session.  Some prompts,
> however, can recalculate the list of completions based on the selected
> candidate.  A case in point is `find-file` (or any command with the `file`
> completion category) which dynamically adjusts the completions to show
> only the elements which extend the given file system path.  We call such
> cases "dynamic completion".  Due to their particular nature, these need
> to be handled explicitly.  The present user option is provided primarily
> to raise awareness about this state of affairs.


### Deprecation of mct-region-completions-format

The `mct-region-completions-format` used to be the only user option that
affected the `mct-region-mode`.  It was removed in the interest of
simplicity and to avoid potential complications or bugs.  Having
separate user options for `mct-minibuffer-mode` and `mct-region-mode` would
inevitably lead to duplication and a considerable expansion of the code
base with all sorts of exceptions and checks.

In-buffer completion now uses the same `mct-completions-format` as its
minibuffer-based counterpart.


### Deprecation of regexp for name of Completions

There used to be a user option `mct-completion-windows-regexp` which
targeted the name of the `*Completions*` buffer.  This was legacy code
from the early days of the code base: there is no reason to provide a
customisation of this sort.  The `defcustom` has been converted into a
`defvar` so anyone who still needs the feature can access it:
`mct--completions-window-name`.


## Sorting the completions on Emacs 29

Starting with commit `a46421446f` to emacs.git (by me) users have the
option to control how the completions are sorted: the variable is
`completions-sort`.  Its default value is the same as before, namely, a
lexicographic order, though it accepts an arbitrary function.

The mct manual provides samples of such functions (improvements are
always welcome):
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct#h:493922c7-efdc-4b63-aa96-b31c684eb4fa>.

Or evaluate:

    (info "(mct) Sort completion candidates on Emacs 29")

For your convenience:

    ;; Some sorting functions...
    (defun my-sort-by-alpha-length (elems)
      "Sort ELEMS first alphabetically, then by length."
      (sort elems (lambda (c1 c2)
                    (or (string-version-lessp c1 c2)
                        (< (length c1) (length c2)))))))
    
    (defun my-sort-by-history (elems)
      "Sort ELEMS by minibuffer history.
    Use `mct-sort-sort-by-alpha-length' if no history is available."
      (if-let ((hist (and (not (eq minibuffer-history-variable t))
                          (symbol-value minibuffer-history-variable))))
          (minibuffer--sort-by-position hist elems)
        (my-sort-by-alpha-length elems)))
    
    (defun my-sort-multi-category (elems)
      "Sort ELEMS per completion category."
      (pcase (mct--completion-category)
        ('nil elems) ; no sorting
        ('kill-ring elems)
        ('project-file (my-sort-by-alpha-length elems))
        (_ (my-sort-by-history elems))))
    
    ;; Specify the sorting function.
    (setq completions-sort #'my-sort-multi-category)

Remember to check the manual for all known completion categories.


## Changes to the manual

-   The documentation has been overhauled to better present its
    contents. User options now have a parent section while each of them
    occupies its own node, making it easier to find exactly what one
    needs.

-   There is a workaround on how to circumvent the known issue where
    `global-hl-line-mode` overrides the mct highlight.  Thanks to Tomasz
    Hołubowicz for the feedback in issue 1 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct/issues/1>.

-   A node is included which explains that mct uses the remap mechanism
    for specifying key bindings when it is appropriate.  As this can lead
    to unexpected issues in certain user configurations, the manual
    explains how to resolve any conflict.  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for
    the feedback on the matter (done in various threads).

-   Users of both `mct` and `corfu` packages may experience a conflict.
    Daniel Mendler (Corfu's developer) provided a snippet which is covered
    in the Corfu's README as well as the mct manual on how to address the
    potential issue: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/mct/-/issues/16>.

-   The `emacs-mct` package for Guix is now covered in the section about
    installing mct.  Thanks to Andrew Tropin and Nicolas Goaziou for
    making it happen: <https://issues.guix.gnu.org/53812>.


## Bug fixes and other refinements

-   The timer which controls when the Completions' buffer is displayed or
    updated now cancels any outdated constructs instead of creating new
    ones.  In other words, it is optimised.  Thanks to Daniel Mendler for
    the patch which was sent via email and is recorded as commit `4ce1004`.

-   Version `0.4.1` fixed a regression with an out-of-bounds motion when
    performing certain motions in the `*Completions*` with a numeric
    argument.

-   Version `0.4.2` addressed a regression where `mct-region-mode` would fail
    to perform live updates.  Thanks to Z.Du for reporting the bug in
    issue 17: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/mct/-/issues/17>.

-   Motions in the Completions buffer are now always based on the
    candidate rather than the line.  The old design would fail to identify
    the first (topmost) candidate if its text was prefixed by entries that
    were not part of the completion table, such as icons provided by the
    `all-the-icons-completion` package.

-   The command `mct-keyboard-quit-dwim` (bound to `C-g` by default) now works
    properly with the `mct-region-mode`.  Thanks to James Norman Vladimir
    Cash for the contribution in merge request 5:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/mct/-/merge_requests/5>.

-   The `mct-highlight-candidate` no longer hardcodes colour values and
    instead inherits from the `highlight` face.  This makes things easier
    for themes (if you use the `modus-themes` package (by me), mct is now
    affected by the option `modus-themes-completions`).  Thanks to Tomasz
    Hołubowicz for the side note about this face in issue 1 over at the
    GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct/issues/1>.

-   Cycling the completion candidates no longer fails when the one at
    point consists of empty spaces and/or newlines.  Thanks to Tomasz
    Hołubowicz for reporting the bug in issue 2 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct/issues/2>.
