---
title: 'Ef themes 0.7.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).  Watch the presentation of the original version,
which demonstrates the first eight themes in the collection and explains
a few technical points: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-08-18-ef-themes-demo/>.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Extremely Fatigued of Themes Having Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

* * *

## Introduced the `ef-bio` and `ef-frost` themes

These two new themes bring the total count to 16.

-   `ef-bio` is a dark theme with green, teal, blue, and purple colours.
    Read the announcement, which also includes screen shots:
    <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-10-02-ef-themes-bio-theme/>.

-   `ef-frost` is a light theme with blue, cyan, teal, and purple
    colours.  Check the announcement on my website (with screenshots):
    <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-10-03-ef-themes-frost-theme/>.

You may have noticed that some themes in this collection have a
`-dark` or `-light` suffix in their name.  This means that they are
stylistically close to each other (NOT identical colour mappings
though).  For example the `ef-trio-dark` and `ef-trio-light` follow
the same idea of using three main hues across almost all interfaces
(magenta, blue, teal).  Whereas all other themes are designed to stand
on their own and have no obvious counterpart.  Nevertheless, one can
pick whichever two themes they prefer to switch between.  Refer to the
user option `ef-themes-to-toggle` and then invoke the command
`ef-themes-toggle`.  Else use the command `ef-themes-load-random`,
optionally with a prefix argument (`C-u`) to limit the choice to dark
or light themes.

Thanks to Sven Seebeck for reminding me to register the `ef-frost` as
part of the collection.  I forgot to do it the day I published the
theme.  This information is shared with permission, as it was done via
a private channel.


## General refinements

-   Changed the dates in `org-agenda` buffers to use the same style as
    headings level 1 instead of 3.  This ensures that they are always
    sufficiently distinct from the title of the agenda structure (there
    can be many titles for those who use block agendas).  In the agenda,
    the block titles use the equivalent of the Org `#+title` construct,
    i.e. heading level 0.
    
    The style of all heading levels is subject to the user option
    `ef-themes-headings`: it affects their height, weight, and whether
    they have a proportionately spaced font, on a per-level basis.

-   Tweaked the background colour which is used by Org (among others) to
    highlight the calculated date in its relevant prompts or when
    rescheduling an item in the agenda.  The changes are subtle in most
    cases, with the intent to make the colour fit better with the rest
    of the theme.
    
    This background is also used to highlight in its original context an
    Org source block that is shown in its own buffer following the use
    of `C-c '` (`org-edit-special`).

-   Adjusted the style of the filter that is used in the header of Org
    agenda searches.  It now always complements the rest of the text on
    that line.  To understand what I am referring to, do `M-x
      org-agenda`, then type `s`, and search for, say, `TODO`.  In the
    resulting buffer, the header reads: `Search words: TODO`.  The final
    part is this filter.

-   Changed the applicable colours of `org-agenda-clocking` to use a
    combination of yellow foreground and yellow-tinted background.  This
    face is used to highlight in the agenda the currently clocked in
    task.  The element is easier to spot, without being too intense.

-   Reduced the overall colouration in the `vc-dir` buffer.  It should
    now look appropriate across all the Ef themes, while remaining
    usable.

-   Aligned the style of the `gnus-summary-low-unread` face with that of
    all the other "low" scoring messages to use italicised fonts (by
    inheriting from the `italic` face).

-   Added support for the `log-edit-headers-separator` (which I added to
    Emacs 29) and `child-frame-border` (Emacs 28) faces.  They basically
    add an appropriately coloured border in relevant contexts.

-   Removed the background colour from the `line-number-major-tick`,
    `line-number-minor-tick` faces.  These are used by the
    `display-line-numbers-mode` with something like:
    
    ```elisp
    (setq display-line-numbers-major-tick 20
          display-line-numbers-minor-tick 5)
    ```

-   Wrote a Do-It-Yourself guide to make the style of the mode lines
    emulate the default of my `modus-themes`: shades of grey with a
    border around them.

-   Answered a frequently asked question about the availability of too
    many options.  In short: pick `ef-light` and/or `ef-dark` and take
    it slow.

-   Finally, the most important entry in the list thus far&#x2026;  The new
    backronym for EF THEMES is: Extremely Fatigued of Themes Having
    Exaggerated Markings, Embellishments, and Sparkles. 🙃


## Changed the email colours of the `ef-trio-dark`, `ef-trio-light`

These are two themes that were introduced in the previous version of
the project (`0.6.0`).  In `message.el` buffers, which are used by
Gnus, Mu4e, and Notmuch, the quote levels now have colour combinations
that are closer in spirit to the rest of the theme's aesthetic.

The "trio" themes use magenta, blue, and teal hues.  The previous
design prioritised teal, which broke the established patterns.  It was
not terrible per se, but it did not feel right when switching through
the various contexts.

[ If you think that something "does not feel right" in a given theme,
  please let me know.  I make mistakes and there is always scope for
  refinements or even the creation of a new theme. ]


## Intensified the diff colours of `ef-spring`

The greens, in particular, were too subtle and could be missed against
the green-tinted light background of the theme.  The new colour values
are consistent with the overall character of the theme, while
improving on the usability of the relevant interfaces.


## Revised the "rainbow" colours for `ef-winter`

Each theme's palette has a subset of colour mappings that apply to
constructs such as Org headings.  For `ef-winter`, those were somewhat
inconsistent with the theme's character, in that they had certain hues
or sequences thereof that stood out more than they should.  The new
design has more harmonious colour combinations.


## Changes to `ef-deuteranopia-dark`, `ef-deuteranopia-light`

-   Revised the subset of each theme's palette that applies to graphs or
    related.  These are much better than before, in that they account
    for red-green colour deficiency, but they will never be perfect in
    practice because whatever mode displays graphs needs to be designed
    from the outset with deuteranopia in mind.  For example, the
    `org-habit` graph is BY DESIGN unsuitable for colour blindness
    because of the colour coding it introduces combined with the way it
    displays its information. We cannot fix that at the theme level.

-   Tweaked the colour of the backgrounds used in `dired` marked items,
    `org-modern` TODO or DONE keywords, and related.  These backgrounds
    now stand out a bit more, while retaining their original character.


## Miscellaneous

There are lots of other fine tweaks to individual themes and the
manual.  If you think something is missing or does not look right,
please let me know.

Lastly, I copy an excerpt of a discussion on the emacs-devel mailing
list with the participation of Philip Kaludercic.  It is about my
plans with the `ef-themes` and how maintainable the project is:
<https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2022-10/msg00060.html>.

    From: Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com>
    To: Philip Kaludercic <philipk@posteo.net>, emacs-devel@gnu.org
    Subject: Re: [elpa] externals/ef-themes b6fc326946: Add ef-bio theme
    Date: Sun, 02 Oct 2022 15:18:28 +0300
    
    > From: Philip Kaludercic <philipk@posteo.net>
    > Date: Sun,  2 Oct 2022 11:50:52 +0000
    >
    > ELPA Syncer <elpasync@gnu.org> writes:
    >
    >> branch: externals/ef-themes
    >> commit b6fc32694646c65adbf1ed6d3d7bfddf55e16273
    >> Author: Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com>
    >> Commit: Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com>
    >>
    >>     Add ef-bio theme
    >>     
    >>     Read the announcement, which also includes screen shots:
    >>     <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-10-02-ef-themes-bio-theme/>.
    >>     
    >>     Enjoy your new theme :)
    >
    > Out of curiosity, what is your long-term plan for ef-themes?  Do you
    > plan to add more and more variations, or is there some upper bound you
    > plan to approach?  It seems to me that maintenance will become more and
    > more difficult, and it would be a shame to see the nice themes
    > abandoned, because of it becoming infeasible to properly test all the
    > changes.
    
    This is why the principle is to not add customisation options that
    introduce colour permutations (e.g. change the intensity of the
    'region').  Those will indeed make the project unmaintainable.
    
    Without customisation options, the maintenance is manageable.  It is
    basically limited to the occasional tweak to the supported faces.
    Granted, now I am still iterating on the individual colour palettes
    because we have not yet reached version 1.0.0 (maybe before the end of
    the year).
    
    The supported packages are also curated.  Unlike the modus-themes, not
    every package is meant to be covered.
    
    In terms of total number of themes, I started working on another light
    theme to bring the total number to 16.  I will probably finalise it
    tonight or tomorrow.  Then I MIGHT develop two more themes specifically
    for tritanopia (blue-yellow colour deficiency), which will be the final
    ones.
    
    > Also, do you think that splitting up the theme into multiple packages
    > would be a good idea?
    
    I am not against it per se, if there is some practical reason to do it
    (e.g. to bundle two of the themes with some other project).  Though now
    I feel it is easier to keep them all in one package.

I don't know if the possible tritanopia-optimised themes will be "the
final ones", as there may be scope for more entries.  But this is the
idea for the time being.
