---
title: 'Ef themes 0.5.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).  Watch the presentation of the original version,
which demonstrates the first eight themes in the collection and explains
a few technical points: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-08-18-ef-themes-demo/>.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>

* * *

## New duo-chrome themes

The collection now includes two items which apply shades of blue and
yellow in most interfaces.  The themes are named `ef-duo-dark` and
`ef-duo-light`.

Read the announcement:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-09-06-ef-themes-duo/>.

View all image samples:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>.

The choice of blue and yellow is largely stylistic: it is not done to
accommodate users with red-green colour deficiency.  For that case, the
Ef themes provide `ef-deuteranopia-dark` and `ef-deuteranopia-light`.


## Bespoke accent colours for the mode line

Each theme now includes a subset of foreground values optimised for use
against the active mode line's background.  The active mode line's
background is accented, meaning that we cannot use colours that are
otherwise decent against the main background.

These new entries are meant to style warnings, errors, and other
notifications that appear on the mode line.  They empower us to extend
support for packages that make use of such colour-coding (more further
below).


## "Subtle" accented backgrounds

Each theme's palette now contains six accented backgrounds that are not
very intense.  These are used by packages that need to (i) highlight a
line or region, (ii) preserve a modicum of legibility without overriding
existing foreground values (more below about new packages).


## Refined the colour of prompts, where necessary

Each theme's palette now includes a dedicated `prompt` mapping.  This
gives us full control over what colour we use for prompts.  In some
themes the prompt will look the same as before, though I made a few
changes to have stylistic consistency in each theme.  Specifically:

```
| Theme                 | Old prompt   | New prompt     |
|-----------------------+--------------+----------------|
| ef-deuteranopia-dark  | cyan-warmer  | yellow         |
| ef-deuteranopia-light | cyan         | blue           |
| ef-duo-dark           | green-cooler | yellow         |
| ef-duo-light          | green-cooler | blue           |
| ef-spring             | blue         | green          |
| ef-summer             | cyan-cooler  | magenta-warmer |
| ef-winter             | green-cooler | magenta-warmer |
```

In short: we don't want prompts to look blue/green all the time.  Some
themes have a different character.


## Newly supported packages

In general, if a package does not look right, it is not supported by the
Ef themes.  What we have for this release:

-   **auctex:** Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for providing the sample file
    that let me view the relevant faces, as well as for helping me
    correct some mistakes of mine:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3C87h71t97hl.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.

-   **company:** Thanks to Alan Schmitt for reminding me about it:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3C87pmgjw3j9.fsf%40m4x.org%3E>.

-   **dirvish:** Thanks to Alex Lu (`dirvish` developer) for the
    contribution.  This was done in pull request 14 at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/pull/14>.  The change is
    below the ~15 line threshold and thus does not require copyright
    assignment to the Free Software Foundation.

-   **doom-modeline:** Expanded support for almost all the faces it
    provides.  The only exception is some debugging-related indicators
    that I do not know how to trigger (contact me, if you encounter them).
    This support is made possible by the new accented foregrounds that are
    designed specifically for the mode line.

-   **gnus:** Expanded support for all the faces it defines.  I had used
    Gnus for several months before and am familiar with its interfaces.
    Though I never made use of its scoring system.  I think the relevant
    faces look okay, though please let me know if we can refine them
    further.

-   **image-dired:** This is made possible by the new "subtle" coloured
    backgrounds that I added to each theme.

-   **lin (my package):** Made possible by the new subtle backgrounds.

-   **pulsar (my package):** Same as above.

-   **pulse:** Same.

-   **recursion-indicator:** Same

-   **selectrum:** Made it look like the already supported `vertico`.

-   **tempel:** Same as `lin` and friends.


## Refinements to existing faces

-   Lots of small tweaks affect mode line indicators, per the new
    foreground colours I introduced.  Expect to see a bit more colour in
    the mode line when using `magit`, compilation buffers, appointment
    reminders, keyboard macros, Org agenda filters, and more.

-   All the `rcirc` faces have been revised in the interest of thematic
    consistency.

    -   Rcirc uses the new foregrounds for the mode line, where relevant.

    -   Indicators that track/highlight the user's nick use the same
        paradigm.

    -   IRC server messages look like comments in code buffers.

    Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for telling me about the downsides of
    using the `italic` in the `rcirc-nick-in-message-full-line` face:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3C87edwphahl.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.

    Please note that I am not a regular/experienced IRC user.  If there
    are improvements to be made, I am happy to implement them but will
    likely need your help (I will ask the relevant questions).


## New fallback behaviour for `ef-themes-toggle`

The command `ef-themes-toggle` will switch between two themes specified
in the user option `ef-themes-to-toggle`.  For example:

```elisp
;; Toggle between `ef-summer' and `ef-winter' using `ef-themes-toggle'.
(setq ef-themes-to-toggle '(ef-summer ef-winter))
```

By default, `ef-themes-to-toggle` is nil. In the past, this meant that
`ef-themes-toggle` would do nothing out-of-the-box.  To improve the
initial user experience, the command will now fall back to minibuffer
completion to load a theme if `ef-themes-to-toggle` does not have the
expected value.  The completion candidates are the items of the Ef
themes collection.  This fallback behaviour is essentially the same as
what the user gets by invoking the `ef-themes-select` command.

When `ef-themes-to-toggle` is set properly, the corresponding command
will perform the switch, as intended.

This is based on the discussion with Philip Kaludercic about revising
the `ef-themes-toggle` command to have a more Do-What-I-Mean behaviour:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3C878rmwfs0e.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.


## Improved how `ef-themes-load-random` picks subsets

The `ef-themes-load-random` command accepts a prefix argument (`C-u`, by
default): it prompts the user for a `dark` or `light` subset out of the
collection.  Once that is selected, the command loads a theme at random.

Before, the prompt was using minibuffer completion, but this has now
changed to a `read-multiple-choice` function, meaning that `d` selects
`dark` and `l` selects `light`.  Basically, we skip possible extra key
presses.

Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for the patch:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/patches/35089>.


## Internal changes

-   Fixed the initial colors' list in the ~ef-themes-with-colors~ macro.
    Thanks to Steve Molitor for telling me that the previous design would
    not work if ~ef-light~ was not loaded.  This was done in issue 11 at
    the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/11>.

-   Simplified the helper function `ef-themes--current-theme`.  Thanks to
    Jonas Collberg for the feedback in issue 12 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/12>.  Also thanks to
    Jonas for the subsequent patch in pull request 13:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/pull/13>.  The change is
    below the ~15 line threshold and thus does not require copyright
    assignment to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Refined the colour mapping of some themes to improve overall
    aesthetics and/or usability, without deviating from the theme's
    established character.  For example, in the `ef-dark` I adjusted the
    mappings for dates, links, and names.  This helps distinguish all
    elements, while retaining the overall looks of the design.  Some
    contexts where that is relevant:

    -   Notmuch search buffers
    -   Magit commit log
    -   Org clocktables
    -   Org documents with links, to-do, etc.

    I will not cover all such technicalities.  Please consult the Git
    commit log.  If, however, some new combination of colours feels
    awkward, you are welcome to tell me about it.

-   Made improvements to the manual and implemented other internal
    changes.
