---
title: 'Emacs: logos version 0.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my logos package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Logos is a small package for Emacs that provides the means for a simple
focus mode utilising page breaks or outline headings.  I have been using
it for a while now in all my videos, including the presentation I
prepared for LibrePlanet 2022 (the conference takes place this weekend).
[Watch the demo of logos.el](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-11-emacs-logos-demo/)
and refer to [the manual](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos) for the
relevant details.  That page also includes links to the GitLab repo and
its mirror on GitHub.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 0.2.0 on 2022-03-17

All functions or variables referenced herein have documentation strings
and are also documented in the manual.

-   Implemented the user option `logos-olivetti` which is a buffer-local
    variable that is read when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  This
    provides the glue code to integrate Logos with `olivetti`.  Olivetti
    is a package by Paul W. Rankin which centres the contents of the
    buffer in its window.

-   Removed the do-it-yourself snippet that was present in the manual for
    piecing together Logos and Olivetti.  The documentation has been
    updated accordingly.  Users who followed the old method are advised to
    review their configurations.

-   Abstracted the state handling of the variables and modes that are
    affected by `logos-focus-mode`, based on feedback by Daniel Mendler.
    This improves how the code is written and makes it easier to extend
    it.

-   Introduced the user options `logos-indicate-buffer-boundaries` and
    `logos-buffer-read-only`.  Both are buffer-local and both take effect
    when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  The former controls the
    `indicate-buffer-boundaries` while the latter determines whether the
    buffer should be put in a read-only mode.

-   Changed how user options are declared as buffer-local, by using the
    appropriate keyword of `defcustom`.  Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for
    the patch, which was sent via email.

-   Wrote a node entry on how to write a regular expression that targets
    only specific Org heading levels.  This pertains to user options
    `logos-outlines-are-pages` and `logos-outline-regexp-alist`.

-   Added keywords to the package metadata to help its discoverability.

-   Fixed typo in a function's doc string.  Thanks to Remco van 't Veer
    for the contribution in merge request 1:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/logos/-/merge_requests/1>.

-   Fixed typo in the manual.  Thanks to user Ypot for the contribution in
    merge request 2:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/logos/-/merge_requests/2>.

-   Appended an "Acknowledgements" section in the manual, which references
    the names of everyone involved in the development of this package.
