---
title: 'Ef themes 0.4.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` are a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).  Watch the presentation of the original version,
which demonstrates the first eight themes in the collection and explains
a few technical points: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-08-18-ef-themes-demo/>.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>

* * *

## New deuteranopia-friendly themes

Designed two bespoke themes for users with red-green colour deficiency
or blindness (deuteranopia).  They rely on blue and yellow hues.  Their
names are:

-   `ef-deuteranopia-dark`
-   `ef-deuteranopia-light`

Announcement with sample pictures:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-08-19-ef-themes-deuteranopia/>.


## User options

-   Introduced the variable `ef-themes-mixed-fonts`.  When it is set to a
    non-nil (`t`) value, it makes spacing-sensitive elements use a
    monospaced font.  For example, Org tables and code blocks will always
    look properly aligned.  This is useful for those who either use a
    proportionately spaced font as their default or enable the built-in
    `variable-pitch-mode`.

-   Implemented the variable `ef-themes-variable-pitch-ui`.  When it is
    set to a non-nil (`t`) value, it renders the mode-line, tab-bar-mode,
    and tab-line-mode in a proportionately spaced font.

User options must be set before the theme is loaded.  If an option
changes, its value will be read upon a theme re-load.

For font configurations, refer to my `fontaine` package.


## Newly supported packages

Built into Emacs:

-   eww
-   shell-script-mode (sh-mode)
-   shr

External packages:

-   consult
-   embark


## Refinements to faces

-   Fixed the scaling of current line of `display-line-numbers-mode` when
    `text-scale-adjust` was invoked.  Basically I forgot to include the
    `line-number` face, while all others were covered.  Thanks to Anthony
    Chavez for the feedback in issue 7 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/7>.

-   Covered all faces that define group titles in completion contexts.
    These are headings which are used by various commands, such as
    `consult-buffer`, `consult-imenu`, and `consult-grep`.  As they denote
    a group name, we apply the `name` colour mapping (the hue differs for
    each theme).  And since they are titles, we inherit from `bold` to
    make them look like headings.  Thanks to Summer Emacs for the feedback
    which amounted to:
    1.  Treating group titles as headings.
    2.  Using a more consistent colour theme-wide.

-   Revised the `compilation-info` face from a colour-coded "success" face
    to a value that is consistent with the semantics of its application in
    file names or related (as seen in the emacs.git repository).  For
    example, file names in Grep or Xref buffers will now look like they
    belong to the theme, whereas before they were predominantly green,
    even when that did not make sense.  This point is connected to the
    above, such as in workflows that go from the minibuffer to a Grep
    buffer (e.g. with the use of the `embark` package).

-   Toned down the vertical border between windows by explicitly
    supporting the `vertical-border` face.  The previous design would use
    the main foreground which generally led to a disproportionately
    intense result.

-   Adjusted all spacing-sensitive faces to accommodate the user option
    `ef-themes-mixed-fonts`, as noted above.  Also thanks to Christopher
    League for spotting that I had missed the `line-number` face and for
    providing the relevant patch (I do the same in the `modus-themes`):
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3C871qt2x4wi.fsf%40nita.mail-host-address-is-not-set%3E>

    The patch is well below the ~15 line threshold and thus does not
    require copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Enforced mono spacing for the `org-indent` face.  This is essential
    for `org-indent-mode` to align entries correctly.  Thanks to Steve
    Molitor for reporting this in the issue 9 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/9>.  Steve tested a
    sample file with `modus-vivendi` and got the desired results.  It
    reminded me how I handle this face in the `modus-themes`.

-   Added explicit support for the `bold` and `italic` faces.  The default
    definition of `italic` has conditionality which we do not want, such
    as drawing an underline if the font does not have italics (e.g. Fira
    Code).  Styling it at the theme level prevents that from happening:
    the font without italics will simply use the upright/roman glyphs.
    Adding `bold` is just for clarity.  Its default definition is fine.

-   Made the tabs of the built-in `tab-bar-mode` and `tab-line-mode` stand
    out more.  The difference between the current tab and the rest was too
    subtle.  Depending on the lighting conditions, their respective
    backgrounds were indistinguishable.  Thanks to Summer Emacs for
    reporting this issue and for helping me decide on the final design.

-   Applied tinted backgrounds to values and arguments in transient.el
    buffers (e.g. Magit).  They now stand out better.


## Documentation

-   Created a page with screenshots of all the Ef themes:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>.

-   Answered the Frequently Asked Question of letting Org tags inherit the
    foreground colour of the heading they belong to.  The gist (though
    note that the entry also mentions the option for the non-alignment of
    tags):

    > Upstream Org defines tags in headings to have the same color as the rest
    > of the heading's text.  However, tags are a distinct component of the
    > heading as noted in the doc string of the `org-get-heading` function.
    > Tags also are functionally different than the ordinary text of the
    > heading: they are a clickable link/button.  It thus is a matter of
    > usability to render this distinction clear at the visual level: I do not
    > agree with upstream Org's design decision.

-   Addressed another Frequently Asked Question on whether we can have
    Ef-style themes inspired by the Nord or Zenburn themes.  The short
    version is that this is technically difficult and undesirable.  Each
    palette in the Ef themes collection is original and is designed around
    the normative and aesthetic principles of this project.

-   Wrote an entire section on Do-It-Yourself customisations.  These
    generally are for advanced users, though the manual provides concrete
    examples of using the `ef-themes-with-colors` macro in tandem with the
    `ef-themes-post-load-hook`.

-   Elaborated on the list of packages that I will most likely NOT support
    in the Ef themes.  The reasons vary though.  Quote:

    > These are difficult to support due to their (i) incompatibility with
    > the design of the `ef-themes`, (ii) complexity or multiple points of
    > entry, (iii) external dependencies, (iv) existence of better
    > alternatives in my opinion, or (v) inconsiderate use of color
    > out-of-the-box and implicit unwillingness to be good Emacs citizens

    If a certain package does not look right, then it is not supported
    (yet).

The manual can be read from Emacs, if the `ef-themes` package is
installed.  Evaluate:

    (info "(ef-themes) Top")

Else visit: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>.


## Internal refinements

-   Recalibrated diff colours or the context of diff buffers, especially
    in Magit, to improve usability.

-   Adjusted or otherwise tweaked the hues that apply to key bindings and
    links in order to reinforce the stylistic consistency of each theme.

-   Introduced a yellow-tinted background which is used in various
    contexts that (i) should be styled with a coloured background but (ii)
    should not be colour-coded as either red or green/blue.

-   Made the `ef-themes-with-colors` macro always reify the current Ef
    theme's palette.  This macro is for advanced users.  Its utility is
    documented in the themes' manual.

-   Fixed how themes become "known" at startup.  Before, they were not
    registered correctly for immediate use with the `ef-themes-select`
    command.  Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the feedback in issue
    6 over at the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/6>.

-   Tweaked some face attributes to work with Emacs 27.

-   Tinkered with the colour mapping or precise values of practically all
    the themes.  Better consult the Git log for the minutiae.  I think the
    identity of each theme is largely defined, though there may still be
    tweaks to be done here and there until we eventually reach version
    `1.0.0`.
