---
title: "Emacs: cursory version 0.3.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Cursory package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Cursory provides a thin wrapper around built-in variables that affect
the style of the Emacs cursor.  The intent is to allow the user to
define preset configurations such as "block with slow blinking" or "bar
with fast blinking" and set them on demand.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `cursory`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/cursory>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/cursory-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/cursory>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/cursory>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/cursory>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/cursory>

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Implemented a mechanism to read fallback values for the presets
    specified in the user option `cursory-presets`.  In practical terms,
    there can now be a `t` preset which holds the default values.  Any
    other named preset overrides the `t`, so it only needs to specify the
    properties that differ from the defaults.  Sample using the original
    value:

    ```elisp
    (setq cursory-presets
          '((box
             :blink-cursor-interval 0.8)
            (box-no-blink
             :blink-cursor-mode -1)
            (bar
             :cursor-type (bar . 2)
             :blink-cursor-interval 0.5)
            (underscore
             :cursor-type (hbar . 3)
             :blink-cursor-blinks 50)
            (t ; the default values
             :cursor-type box
             :cursor-in-non-selected-windows hollow
             :blink-cursor-mode 1
             :blink-cursor-blinks 10
             :blink-cursor-interval 0.2
             :blink-cursor-delay 0.2)))
    ```

-   Expanded the available properties of the user option `cursory-presets`
    to accept a value for the `:blink-cursor-mode` key (as seen in the
    above code block).  It is either `1` or `-1` and is passed to the
    function `blink-cursor-mode`.  The former value enables the mode, the
    latter disables it.  This lets `cursory-presets` set the
    `blink-cursor-mode` per stylistic variant.

-   Refined the default value of the minibuffer prompt that is used by the
    command `cursory-set-preset`.  The default value now is the previous
    element in the history, if it exists.  This makes it easier to toggle
    between the last two choices (select the default value simply by
    pressing `RET` without any further input).

-   Specified a `:package-version` for all user options.  The user is
    informed in relevant Help buffers about the last version that
    introduced or iterated on the variable.

-   The `cursory` group now references the Info manual that ships with the
    GNU ELPA package.  A link is shown in Custom UI buffers.
