---
title: 'Emacs: logos version 0.5.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my logos package for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `logos` package provides a simple approach to setting up a "focus
mode".  It uses the `page-delimiter` or the outline together with some
commands to move between pages whether narrowing is in effect or not.
It also provides some optional aesthetic tweaks which come into effect
when the buffer-local `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  The manual shows
how to extend the code to achieve the desired result.

[Watch the demo of the original version of logos.el](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-11-emacs-logos-demo/)
(all my videos since early 2022 use `logos`).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `logos`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/logos>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos>

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Introduced the function `logos-update-fringe-in-buffers`.  This is a
    convenience function for those who (i) set the user option
    `logos-hide-fringe` to a non-nil value and (ii) switch themes while
    `logos-focus-mode` is enabled in one or more buffers.  This
    convenience function updates the `fringe` face to be consistent with
    the current theme (we technically make the fringe invisible, instead
    of outright disabling it, as that would not be desirable).  It needs
    to be assigned to a hook that gets called in the post-theme-load
    phase.  The `modus-themes` or the `ef-themes` (both by me) provide
    such a hook.  Otherwise the Logos manual explains how to implement one
    for any theme.  Read:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos#h:6a254fa0-5706-4032-8a8b-233ffb1f0e6b>.

-   Implemented the `logos-focus-mode-map`.  This is a keymap that is
    active when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled in the buffer.  One can, for
    example, use it to bind the arrow key to page motions, such as
    `logos-forward-page-dwim`.

    Remember that, by default, pages are delimited with the Control-L
    character (`^L`), though Logos can treat different delimiters as
    "page" separators (e.g. Org headings and a horizontal rule of five
    hyphens).  Consult the user options `logos-outlines-are-pages`,
    `logos-outline-regexp-alist`, and check the manual for relevant simple
    and more advanced code samples.  My current setup for those:


    ```elisp
    (setq logos-outlines-are-pages t)
    (setq logos-outline-regexp-alist
          `((emacs-lisp-mode . ,(format "\\(^;;;+ \\|%s\\)" logos--page-delimiter))
            (org-mode . ,(format "\\(^\\*+ +\\|^-\\{5\\}$\\|%s\\)" logos--page-delimiter))
            (markdown-mode . ,(format "\\(^\\#+ +\\|^[*-]\\{5\\}$\\|^\\* \\* \\*$\\|%s\\)" logos--page-delimiter))
            (conf-toml-mode . "^\\[")
            (t . ,(or outline-regexp logos--page-delimiter))))
    ```

-   Added the `logos-repeat-map`.  This is a keymap that gets enabled when
    the built-in `repeat-mode` is active (Emacs 28 or higher).  This means
    that page motions, `C-x ]` and `C-x [`, can be repeated by following
    them up with either `]` or `[`.  The repetition stops when another
    command is invoked.

    Thanks to Lucy McPhail for the patch:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos/patches/34101>.  The change is
    below the ~15 line threshold and thus requires no copyright assignment
    to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Wrote documentation on how to auto-toggle menu and tool bars while
    using the `logos-focus-mode`.  This is complementary to user options
    provided by Logos and shows how flexible and extensible the code is.
    Thanks to Ypot for raising the question in issue 2 on the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos/issues/2>.

    [ Never hesitate to ask for help if you want to do something with
      Logos but are not sure how. ]

-   Specified the `:version` of all user-facing variables.  This is
    helpful while perusing documentation strings in Help buffers, as any
    change will be assigned to the given version of Logos.

-   Clarified the doc string of the `logos-variable-pitch` user option
    with regard to `prog-mode` buffers.  It now reads thus:

    > When non-nil, use `variable-pitch-mode` where appropriate.
    > In programming modes the default font is always used, as that is
    > assumed to be a monospaced typeface, which is appropriate for
    > spacing-sensitive text.
    >
    > This is only relevant when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.

-   Documented some user options for the built-in `eww` which make its
    contents behave like the rest of Emacs in terms of the use of fonts
    and the filling of paragraphs.  In brief:

    ```elisp
    (setq shr-max-width fill-column)
    (setq shr-use-fonts nil)
    ```

    This is relevant for Logos as we then do not need to implement special
    casing for `logos-focus-mode` to work nicely with `eww` (I am
    personally annoyed when a buffer has its own opinions about font
    settings).

    Thanks to Ypot for discussing this in issue 4 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos/issues/4>.

    [ For font-related customisations check the `fontaine` package on GNU
      ELPA (by me). ]

-   Named the mailing list address as the `Maintainer:` of Logos.
    Together with the other package headers, they help the user find our
    primary sources and/or communication channels.  This change conforms
    with work being done upstream in package.el by Philip Kaludercic.  I
    was informed about it here:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues/%3C875ykl84yi.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.
