---
title: 'Emacs: lin version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my lin package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Lin is a stylistic enhancement for Emacs' built-in `hl-line-mode`.  It
remaps the `hl-line` face (or equivalent) buffer-locally to a style that
is optimal for major modes where line selection is the primary mode of
interaction.  In concrete terms: (i) let your theme use a subtle grey to
highlight the current line in text-editing buffers like Org, and (ii)
render the current line with a more prominent colour in Dired, Ibuffer,
et cetera.  Why?  Because the two types of interaction have different
requirements about how intensely the current line should be highlighted.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `lin`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/lin>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/lin>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/lin>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/lin>
+ Backronym: LIN Is Noticeable

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Clarified the doc string of the user option `lin-mode-hooks`.  This
    variable specifies the list of hooks that `lin-global-mode` will use
    to apply its effect.  Lin enables `hl-line-mode` in the given buffer
    and remaps its face to the value of the `lin-face` user option.

-   Added `pdf-outline-buffer-mode-hook` (from the `pdf-tools` package) to
    the user option `lin-mode-hooks`.  Thanks to Gautier Ponsinet for the
    patch which was sent to my personal email.  The change is below the
    ~15 line threshold and thus requires no copyright assignment to the
    Free Software Foundation.

-   Named the mailing list address as the `Maintainer:` of Lin.  Together
    with the other package headers, they help the user find our primary
    sources and/or communication channels.  This change conforms with work
    being done upstream in package.el by Philip Kaludercic.  I was
    informed about it here:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues/%3C875ykl84yi.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.

-   Made all user-facing variables specify the package version that
    introduced them or last affected their specification.  This
    information is presented in Help buffers.

-   Configured the Lin group in Custom UI buffers to show a link to the
    package's Info manual.  Again, this helps the user find information
    about Lin.

-   Removed old forms that rendered obsolete certain functions or
    variables.  This keeps the code base small and focused on the current
    feature set.

The switch to version `1.0.0` is mostly symbolic.  Lin has been stable
and feature-complete practically since its inception.  This change shows
that most (all?) of the work has been accomplished.

* * *

Sample configuration:

```elisp
(require 'lin)

(setq lin-face 'lin-blue) ; check doc string for alternative styles

;; You can use this to live update the face:
;;
;; (customize-set-variable 'lin-face 'lin-green)

(setq lin-mode-hooks
      '(bongo-mode-hook
        dired-mode-hook
        elfeed-search-mode-hook
        git-rebase-mode-hook
        grep-mode-hook
        ibuffer-mode-hook
        ilist-mode-hook
        ledger-report-mode-hook
        log-view-mode-hook
        magit-log-mode-hook
        mu4e-headers-mode
        notmuch-search-mode-hook
        notmuch-tree-mode-hook
        occur-mode-hook
        org-agenda-mode-hook
        pdf-outline-buffer-mode-hook
        proced-mode-hook
        tabulated-list-mode-hook))

(lin-global-mode 1)
```
