---
title: "Emacs: denote version 0.4.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Defined the `denote-link-dired-marked-notes` command.  It lets the
    user produce a typographic list of links to the note files that are
    marked in Dired.  The list is written at point.  If there are multiple
    buffers which visit Denote notes, the command first prompts with
    minibuffer completion for one among them.

    In terms of workflow, `denote-link-dired-marked-notes` complements the
    `denote-link-add-links` command for those cases where it is easier to
    select files than write an elegant regular expression.

-   Implemented the `denote-dired-rename-marked-files` command.  This
    provides a much-requested facility to perform the familiar renaming
    operation on a set of files.  In particular:

    -   the file's existing file name is retained and becomes the `TITLE`
        field, per Denote's file-naming scheme;

    -   the `TITLE` is sluggified and downcased, per our conventions;

    -   an identifier is prepended to the `TITLE`;

    -   the file's extension is retained;

    -   a prompt is asked once for the `KEYWORDS` field and the input is
        applied to all file names;

    -   if the file is recognised as a Denote note, the command rewrites its
        front matter to include the new keywords.  A confirmation to carry
        out this step is performed once at the outset.  Note that the
        affected buffers are not saved.  The user can thus check them to
        confirm that the new front matter does not cause any problems
        (e.g. with the command `diff-buffer-with-file`).  Multiple buffers
        can be saved with `save-some-buffers` (read its doc string).

    Parts of `denote-dired-rename-marked-files` were added or refined over
    a series of commits.  Consult the Git log for the minutia.  Thanks to
    Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the relevant additions in pull requests
    51 and 52 on the GitHub mirror:

    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/51>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/52>

    Jean-Philippe has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Improved how the `denote-dired-rename-file` command rewrites front
    matter.  Before, it would perform a replacement of the whole block,
    which had the adverse effect of overwriting custom front matter
    entries.  Now, it only targets the lines which hold the title and
    keywords, leaving everything else intact.  Thanks to Peter Prevos for
    reporting the problem and testing the solution to it in issue 60 on
    the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/60>.

-   Introduced the `denote-dired-rename-file-and-add-front-matter` command
    that always prepends front matter to a file whose extension is among
    the supported ones (per the user option `denote-file-type`).  This
    differs from the standard `denote-dired-rename-file` command which
    only rewrites the front matter's title and keywords if they exist.

    In practice, `denote-dired-rename-file-and-add-front-matter` empowers
    the user to convert a generic text file to a Denote note.

    This command was originally added by Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay in pull
    request 49 on the GitHub mirror and refined in subsequent commits:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/49>.  Also read issue 48
    where this idea was originally discussed:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/48>.

-   Added the `denote-dired-rename-marked-files-and-add-front-matters`
    command, which is like the `denote-dired-rename-marked-files` but adds
    front matter instead of rewriting existing one, just how the command
    `denote-dired-rename-file-and-add-front-matter` does it (both are
    mentioned above).  Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the
    refinements to it in pull request 53 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/53>.

-   Wrote an interactive spec for `denote-link-buttonize-buffer`.  It can
    now be invoked with `M-x` or a key binding, should the need arise.
    This function is normally called via a hook and takes effect in plain
    text as well as Markdown files.

-   Extended the fontification rules so that file names with non-ASCII
    characters are styled properly.  This issue was brought up on the
    mailing list by Frank Ehmsen and was discussed with the participation
    of Peter Prevos:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C2273b3b1-344c-6c6e-3ab6-a227b6bc3721%40eh-is.de%3E>.

    The same topic was raised at the same time on the GitHub mirror by
    user hpgisler in issue 61:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/61>.

    After some discussion, we agreed on the right approach, which was
    formalised by Peter Prevos as pull request 64 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/64>.  The change is below
    the ~15 line threshold and thus does not require copyright assignment
    to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Made the registration of the `denote:` custom Org hyperlink type
    conditional on the availability of the `org` feature.  In other words,
    those who do not use Org will not be loading this part of the code.
    Thanks to Abin Simon for reporting the problem and for showing how
    Elfeed handles this case.  This was done in issue 47 on the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/47>.

-   Ensured that duplicate keywords are not produced by the relevant
    prompt.  Thanks to user Taoufik for the contribution in pull request
    50 on the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/50>.
    The change is below the ~15 line threshold and thus does not require
    copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Fixed a typo in the reference to the `crm-separator` in the manual.
    David Wilson (System Crafters channel) spotted the error in a recent
    live stream whose main topic was about Denote (thanks, by the way!):
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QcRY_rsX0yY>.

-   Addressed an inconsistency in the command `denote-link-find-file`
    where it would not recognise links without a title in their format
    (those can be inserted by passing a prefix argument (`C-u` by default)
    to the commands that insert links, such as `denote-link`).

-   Attached conditionality to the `denote` command's `SUBDIRECTORY`
    argument, so that it does not create new file paths.  This is only
    relevant for those who call `denote` from Lisp.  Interactive use is
    the same as before.

-   Clarified that the user option `denote-org-capture-specifiers` can
    accept arbitrary text in addition to the formatting specifiers that
    Org's capture mechanism introduces.

-   Explained in the manual why `denote-org-capture-specifiers` is needed
    instead of writing the capture template directly the way one normally
    does.  The gist is that because our file names are derived dynamically
    based on user input, we need to account for the sequence in which the
    value of arguments is reified by `org-capture`.

-   Refactored how notes are prepared internally.  Thanks to Jean-Philippe
    Gagné Guay for the contribution in pull request 55 on the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/55>.

-   Declared the `denote-punctuation-excluded-extra-regexp` variable which
    is, for the time being, targeted at experienced users.  Its purpose is
    to extend what we consider "illegal" punctuation for the file name.
    Thanks to pRot0ta1p for the feedback in issue 57 over at the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/57>.  Example
    based on the input of pRot0ta1p:

        (setq denote-punctuation-excluded-extra-regexp
              "[『』〖〗｛｝「」【】〔〕［］（）《》〈〉«»！＃￥％…＆＂＇＊，。；：、？—]*")

    The ideal is to make `denote--punctuation-regexp` work for all
    scripts, but that may be unrealistic.

-   Clarified what the manual means by "attachments" to notes.  Those are
    for Org, if the user resorts to the relevant Org mechanisms.  Denote
    does not do any of that.

-   Revised the parsing of a date input as used in the `denote-date`
    command or related.  The idea is to turn `2020-01-15` into something
    like `2020-01-15 16:19` by using the current time, so that the hour
    and minute component is not left to `00:00` when the user does not
    specify it explicitly.

    This reduces the burden on the user who would otherwise need to input
    the time value in order to avoid the error of duplicate identifiers in
    the scenario where the same date is used more than once.

    The change also addresses a difference between Emacs 28 and Emacs 29
    where the former does not read dates without a time component.

    Thanks to Peter Prevos for the feedback in issue 58 over at the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/58>.

-   Fixed compilation warnings in Emacs 29 about the format of doc strings
    that need to output a literal single quote.  Thanks to Kyle Meyer for
    the patch, which was sent on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/34117>.

-   Fixed typo in the user option `denote-prompts` about the
    `crm-separator`.  Thanks to Kyle Meyer for the patch, which was sent
    on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/34116>.

-   Made the built-in `subr-x` library a runtime dependency, due to
    complications with the `when-let*` form.  The problem was made
    manifest in a renaming operation, though it was not about renaming per
    se.  Thanks to hpgisler for reporting the problem in issue 62 and for
    testing the proposed solution:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/62>.

-   Streamlined the use of the `seq` library instead of `cl-lib`, as we
    were already using the former more heavily and there was no need for
    the latter.  Thanks to Philip Kaludercic for pointing this out on the
    emacs-devel mailing list:
    <https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2022-07/msg00838.html>.

-   Added a generic `README.md` file to placate the Git forges.  Neither
    SourceHut nor GitHub/GitLab are fully compliant with the Org markup we
    use in `README.org` (we use Org because it is easy to generate the
    Info manual and HTML pages out of it).  SourceHut will not render the
    file at all, while the others render it but do not parse it properly.

-   Made several other internal tweaks and refinements in the interest of
    robustness and/or clarity.

-   Rewrote all relevant documentation.


## Non-changes

The following are not part of any changes that were made during this
release cycle, though they provide potentially interesting insight into
the workings of the project.

-   **Identifiers with milliseconds:** Denote's identifier format extends up
    to seconds.  This is the product of years of experimentation and is,
    in my opinion, the best compromise between usability/readability and
    precision.  If a user produces two notes within a fraction of a
    second, then yes they will have duplicate identifiers.  In principle,
    there is no reason not to address this potential problem, provided we
    do not compromise on Denote's file-naming scheme (making the
    identifier less readable is a compromise).  We shall see what the best
    course of action is.  Thanks to Felipe Balbi and Jean-Philippe Gagné
    Guay for the discussion thus far in issue 54 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/54>.

-   **Denote and evil-mode:** Users of evil-mode do not have to worry about
    Denote, as we do not define any key bindings.  The manual includes
    sample configuration, which proposes some key bindings, but that is
    the user's prerogative.  Thanks to Saša Janiška and Alan Schmitt for
    their participation on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87czdxf1dz.fsf%40atmarama.ddns.net%3E>.

-   **Denote and Citar:** Peter Prevos started developing a package that
    connects Denote with Citar: <https://github.com/pprevos/denote-citar>.
    The idea is to use notes as part of one's bibliography.  Discussions
    which include sample code on how to leverage `denote` from Lisp:
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C6add8bc63cab0a557fa4b9919e025afc%40prevos.net%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87r12d2w96.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87a69060q6.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>

-   **Denote and graph of connections:** Saša Janiška asked whether Denote
    will provide some way to visualise links between notes.  The answer is
    negative.  Denote's scope is clearly delineated and its feature set is
    largely complete (notwithstanding refinements to what we already
    provide).  Peter Prevos is experimenting with some code that uses the
    R language.  Any such facility will have to be implemented as a
    separate package.  I remain at the disposal of anyone who needs help
    with Denote's internals.  Thanks to the aforementioned fellows for
    their participation on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C878roleze1.fsf%40atmarama.ddns.net%3E>.

-   **Denote's scalability:** There was a discussion whether Denote will
    work well with very large sets of files.  The short answer is that it
    will work the same way Emacs and/or standard Unix tools do: good
    enough!  If there are improvements to be made, which do not jeopardise
    the principles of the project, we shall implement them without
    hesitation.  Thanks to Saša Janiška and Peter Prevos for their
    participation on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87sfmtf7im.fsf%40atmarama.ddns.net%3E>.

-   **Denote's minimum requirement of Emacs 27.2:** We cannot depend on
    Emacs 27.1 due to this message from the byte compiler:

        You should depend on (emacs "27.2") or the (org "9.3") package if you need `org-link-open-as-file'.

    Depending on Org is not an option because Denote optionally works
    without Org, so Emacs 27.2 is what we have to opt for.  If your
    operating system does not provide this version in package format,
    please petition its maintainers/providers to do so.  Thanks to
    Alexander for asking about it on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C9ec818e6a7979efbb2f8b1f5a497665b%40purelymail.com%3E>.

Finally, a mildly interesting piece of trivia: we have exceeded 600
commits since the first day of the project's Git history on 2022-06-04
(the actual history is much longer).  That averages to more than 10 per
day!  I think things will slow down eventually.
