---
title: "Emacs: denote version 0.2.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   Version `0.1.0` (from 2022-06-27) was never built as a package.  The
    reason is that the GNU ELPA machinery reads the `Version:` header of
    the main file, not the git tag.  As the original commit in `denote.el`
    included `Version: 0.1.0`, GNU ELPA rightly tries to build the package
    using that reference.  But because at that time I had not yet updated
    the Copyright header to name the Free Software Foundation, the package
    could not be prepared.  As such, please consider this release to be
    the "first formal stable version".  My apologies for the delay,
    contrary to what was promised in the last change log entry.
    -   Prospective users are advised to read the manual:
        <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>.  For a video demonstration:
        <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.
    
    -   Thanks to Benjamin Kästner for reporting the issue with the GNU ELPA
        package on the mailing list:
        <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C9d600ff0-4fed-2ad7-5dbc-5a194639a045@gmail.com%3E>.

-   Originally, Denote was designed to only work with notes in a flat
    directory.  With code contributions from Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay,
    support for subdirectories of the user option `denote-directory` is
    now available.  This covers the case of creating links between notes,
    following them, and viewing the backlinks' buffer of the current
    entry.
    -   Thanks to Jean-Philippe for the contributions which took place on
        the GitHub mirror:
        -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/24>
        -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/25>
        -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/26>
    
    -   Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay has assigned copyright to the Free Software
        Foundation.  This is a prerequisite to contribute code to any
        package on the official GNU ELPA archive (and to emacs.git for that
        matter).

-   The new `denote-subdirectory` command lets the user select a directory
    to place the new note in.  Available candidates are the value of the
    `denote-directory` as well as all of its subdirectories, minus `.git`.
    In future versions, we will consider how to provide a blocklist or a
    regexp filter for the user to specify which subdirectories should be
    omitted from minibuffer completion.  Please consider providing your
    feedback on the technicalities.
    -   Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay and Shreyas Ragavan for the
        feedback in issue 31 on the GitHub mirror:
        <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/31>.
    
    -   Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for fixing a potential problem in
        how directories are represented when commands enter the directory
        instead of selecting it (again, at the GitHub mirror):
        <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/35>.

-   From 2022-06-24 to 2022-07-03, Denote provided support for links
    between Org notes that leveraged the `id:` hyperlink type.
    Discussions on the mailing list and the GitHub mirror revealed the
    longer-term problems in our implementation.  In the Annex below, I
    provide my detailed opinion on the matter.  The gist is that Denote
    does not&#x2014;and will not&#x2014;create `id:` links between its notes, but
    shall use the `denote:` hyperlink type instead (which works like the
    standard `file:` type).  As the Annex explains, Denote is not org-roam
    lite and we try not to engender such false expectations.
    -   Despite the fact that the relevant patches are no longer applicable,
        I wish to thank Kaushal Modi and Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for their
        contributions over at the GitHub mirror:
        -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/20>
        -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/28>

-   The user option `denote-date-format` controls how the date and time is
    recorded in the file's contents (what we call "front matter").  When
    nil (the default value), we use a file-type-specific format (also
    check the user option `denote-file-type`):
    
    -   For Org, an inactive timestamp is used, such as `[2022-06-30 Wed 15:31]`.
    
    -   For Markdown, the RFC3339 standard is applied: `2022-06-30T15:48:00+03:00`.
    
    -   For plain text, the format is that of ISO 8601: `2022-06-30`.
    
    If the value is a string, ignore the above and use it instead.  The
    string must include format specifiers for the date.  These are described
    in the doc string of `format-time-string`.
    
    The `denote-date-format` supersedes the now obsolete
    `denote-front-matter-date-format`.
    
    Thanks to Peter Prevos and Kaushal Modi for their feedback in issue 27
    on the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/27>.

-   All the faces we define are now declared in the `denote-faces.el`
    file.  The fontification rules are shared by `denote-dired-mode` and
    the backlinks' buffer (invoked by `denote-link-backlinks` and
    controlled by the user option `denote-link-fontify-backlinks`).  The
    current list of faces:
    -   `denote-faces-date`
    -   `denote-faces-delimiter`
    -   `denote-faces-extension`
    -   `denote-faces-keywords`
    -   `denote-faces-subdirectory`
    -   `denote-faces-time`
    -   `denote-faces-title`

-   Named the mailing list address as the `Maintainer:` of Denote.
    Together with the other package headers, they help the user find our
    primary sources and/or communication channels.  This change conforms
    with work being done upstream in package.el by Philip Kaludercic.  I
    was informed about it here:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues/%3C875ykl84yi.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.

-   Fixed how keywords are inferred and combined.  The previous code did not
    work properly when the user option `denote-infer-keywords` was nil.
    It would return a list of symbols, with the parentheses, whereas the
    file name needs a string where each keyword is delimited by an
    underscore.

-   Simplified how information in the front matter is retrieved.  It fixes
    cases where, for example, a special character at the end of the title
    was ignored.  Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the patch over at
    the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/21>.

-   Rewrote parts of the manual in the interest of clarity.


## Annex about discontinuing support for org-id

My thanks for their participation in the discussions go to Jean-Philippe
Gagné Guay, Kaushal Modi, and Shreyas Ragavan.

    commit f35ef05cb451f265213c3aafc1e62c425b1ff043
    Author: Protesilaos Stavrou <info@protesilaos.com>
    Date:   Sun Jul 3 17:34:38 2022 +0300
    
        REMOVE support for 'id:' hyperlink types
    
        The original idea was to support the 'org-id' library on the premise
        that it makes Denote a good Emacs citizen.  However, discussions on the
        mailing list[0] and the GitHub mirror[1] have made it clear to me that
        'org-id' is not consistent with Denote's emphasis on simplicity.
    
        To support the way 'org-id' works, we will eventually have to develop
        some caching mechanism, just how the org-roam package does it.  This is
        because the variable 'org-id-extra-files' needs to be kept up-to-date
        whenever an operation on a file is performed.  At scale, this sort of
        monitoring requires specialised software.  Such a mechanism is outside
        the scope of Denote---if you need a db, use org-roam which is already
        great.
    
        [0] <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C8735fk4y1w.fsf%40hallac.net%3E#%3C877d4un73c.fsf@protesilaos.com%3E>
    
        [1] <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/29>
    
        Quote of what I wrote on the GitHub mirror issue 29:
    
                [ggjp] This is what I was implying.  That we are, in fact,
                providing an option that is not viable long-term, but keeping
                the option for expert users who will be able to handle this.
                And we should warn about this clearly in the doc of that option.
    
            [protesilaos] What you write here @ggjp and what @shrysr explained
            tells me that those expert users will need to be real experts.  To
            put it concretely, I am an experienced Emacs user with no
            programming background, who has written several Emacs
            packages (including the modus-themes which are built into Emacs),
            but I have zero knowledge of using a db or of handling things with
            python and the like.  So if I opt in to 'denote-link-use-org-id' I
            will eventually run into problems that my non-existent skills will
            prevent me from solving.  At that point, I will just use org-roam
            which already handles this use-case in a competent way (and has a
            massive community to rely on in case I need further support).
    
            If each package needs to write its own optimisations and maintain
            its own cache, to me this shows that 'org-id' is not good enough for
            the time being: more work needs to be done in org.git to provide a
            universal solution.
    
            I wanted to support 'org-id' by default on the premise that Denote
            must be a good Emacs citizen which interoperates with the rest of
            the wider ecosystem.  But if 'org-id' leaves something to be
            desired, then that goal is not worth pursuing: we add complexity to
            our code, offer an option that we cannot genuinely/adequately
            support, and make usage of it contingent on reading the docs and
            having a high level of expertise.
    
            I think being a good Emacs citizen is a laudable principle.  In this
            case, the right thing to do is to recommend the use of org-roam
            instead of trying to accommodate 'org-id'.  As such, I have now
            changed my mind and think we should remove what we previously added.
    
            For some context here: the reason I never used org-roam is
            because (i) it is Org-specific whereas I write notes in different
            file types and (ii) I did not want to ever rely on a db or
            equivalent dependency.
    
            <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/29#issuecomment-1173036924>
    
     README.org         | 226 ++++++++---------------------------------------------
     denote-link.el     |  99 ++++++-----------------
     denote-retrieve.el |   2 +-
     denote.el          |  14 +---
     4 files changed, 63 insertions(+), 278 deletions(-)

Followed up by my explanation:

    > can we not have denote style links to be default for (de)notes - and
    > explicitly supported, while if they need to, users can still link
    > denote org files via org-id to any other notes/files (and vice versa)
    > -- in which case performance + testing for org-id driven linking is
    > not within Denote's purview at all?
    
    The formal support for `id:` links was added shortly before the release
    of version `0.1.0`.  In the days prior, we supported what you describe
    via the manual.  The user could change the `denote-org-front-matter`
    variable to include a `PROPERTIES` drawer.  This possibility still
    exists, though yesterday I removed the relevant entry from the manual.
    This way only the real do-it-yourself experts will go down that path.
    
    My concern here is with managing expectations.  If our Org notes are
    superficially the same as org-roam's, an unsuspecting user may think
    that Denote is an org-roam lite.  We will thus get issues/requests, such
    as those already mentioned in this GitHub repo, about migrating from
    org-roam to Denote.  While there are similarities, Denote is not a
    minimalist org-roam and I would not like to encourage the idea of
    treating the two as interchangeable.
    
    Doing things half-way-through is a way to create false expectations.  A
    package on GNU ELPA must be usable by users of all skill levels.  If the
    functionality we provide is incomplete and needs to be covered by
    user-level tweaks, we are excluding a portion of the user base while
    still assuming the maintenance burden.  If someone trusts Denote to,
    say, write a 1000 notes, we do not want to surprise them after the fact.
    Imagine if the reported issues that triggered this change happened 6
    months into one's daily usage of Denote: it wouldn't be nice.
    
    Setting the right expectations is a matter of responsibility: we let the
    user make a more informed choice and show respect for their time.  It
    also makes it easier for me to keep Denote's scope in check by not
    supporting every little extra that Org implements.  The premier Org
    extension is org-roam: we do not need another one (or, if we do, I am
    not the one to implement it).
    
    * * *
    
    Some comments on the `denote:` hyperlink type for Org as they may be
    relevant in this context:
    
    * It is meant to work like the standard `file:` type.  This means that
      it links to a file, while it can also have additional search
      parameters, as explained in the Org manual.  Evaluate:
    
          (info "(org) Search Options")
    
    * It does not read the front matter, but only the file name.  You can
      create a note as usual, delete all its contents, save it, and try to
      link to it from another note.  It works.
    
    * Exporting now works like the `file:` type for HTML, LaTeX, Texinfo,
      and Markdown.  Technically, it also supports the ASCII backend but the
      format of the output could be tweaked further.
    
    There may be refinements to be made, which is okay as that is part of a
    maintainer's duties.

