---
title: 'Modus themes 2.6.0 for GNU Emacs'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published the latest stable release of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The change log
entry is reproduced below.  For any questions, feel welcome to [contact
me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will now prepare the patch for emacs.git which will then trickle down
to GNU ELPA (the `modus-themes` is a `:core` package).  Thank you for
your patience!

* * *

## 2.6.0

### Changes to supported faces or face groups

* Made the `font-lock-warning-face` adapt to comments.  This changes the
  face from a yellow to a red hue when the user adds a value to
  `modus-themes-syntax` which includes `yellow-comments` property.
  Before, this face was indistinguishable from yellow comments due to a
  regression in version 2.5.0 of the themes.  Thanks to Augusto Stoffel
  and Manuel Uberti for their feedback on the mailing list:
  <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C87r11k1c22.fsf%40gmail.com%3E>.

* Applied a consistent foreground color (a not-so-intense yellow hue) to
  the `org-checkbox` and `markdown-gfm-checkbox-face`.  The change comes
  from the discussion on the mailing list where it became apparent that
  a bit of colour is needed for such constructs:
  <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm2fsi9cja4.fsf%40me.com%3E>.

  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič, Christian Tietze, and Karthik Chikmagalur
  for their participation.

* Added support for the `mu4e-related-face`.  Thanks to Simon Pugnet for
  the feedback on the mailing list:
  <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C87edxhvqwp.fsf@polaris64.net%3E>.

* Included support for the `consult-preview-insertion` face.  There are
  two reasons for adding this:

  1. It decouples it from the `region` face, which means that the user
     option `modus-themes-region` no longer has an unintended effect on
     it.

  2. It makes it look consistent with the `rectangle-preview` face (see
     it in action with C-x SPC, move point down a few lines, type C-t
     and then insert some text).  I feel these sort of previews need to
     look the same, though I don't have a strong attachment to the style
     now in use.


### Removed support for the 'solaire' package

The `solaire-mode` package dims the background of what it considers
ancillary "UI" buffers, such as the minibuffer and Dired buffers.  The
Modus themes used to support Solaire on the premise that the user was
(i) opting in to it, (ii) understood why certain buffers were more gray,
and (iii) knew what other adjustments had to be made to prevent broken
visuals (e.g. the default style of the `modus-themes-completions` uses a
subtle gray background for the selection, which with Solaire becomes
practically invisible).

However, the assumption that users opt in to this feature does not
always hold true.  There are cases where it is enabled by default such
as in the popular Doom Emacs configuration.  Thus, the unsuspecting user
who loads `modus-operandi` or `modus-vivendi` without the requisite
customizations is getting a sub-par experience; an experience that we
did not intend and cannot genuinely fix.

[ Relevant reading about "The case of git-gutter, the modus-themes, and
  Doom Emacs":
  <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-08-04-doom-git-gutter-modus-themes/> ]

Because the Modus themes are meant to work everywhere, we cannot make an
exception for Doom Emacs and/or Solaire users.  Furthermore, we shall
not introduce hacks, such as by adding a check in all relevant faces to
be adjusted based on Solaire or whatever other package.  Hacks of this
sort are unsustainable and penalize the entire userbase.  Besides, the
themes are built into Emacs and we must keep their standard high.

The fundamental constraint with Solaire is that Emacs does not have a
real distinction between "content" and "UI" buffers.  For themes to work
with Solaire, they need to be designed around that package.  Such is an
arrangement that compromises on our accessibility standards and/or
hinders our efforts to provide the best possible experience while using
the Modus themes.

As such, `solaire-mode` is not---and will not be---supported by the
Modus themes (or any other of my themes, for that matter).  Users who
want it must style the faces manually.  Below is some sample code, based
on what we cover at length in the manual:

```elisp
(defun my-modus-themes-custom-faces ()
  (modus-themes-with-colors
    (custom-set-faces
     `(solaire-default-face ((,class :inherit default :background ,bg-alt :foreground ,fg-dim)))
     `(solaire-line-number-face ((,class :inherit solaire-default-face :foreground ,fg-unfocused)))
     `(solaire-hl-line-face ((,class :background ,bg-active)))
     `(solaire-org-hide-face ((,class :background ,bg-alt :foreground ,bg-alt))))))

(add-hook 'modus-themes-after-load-theme-hook #'my-modus-themes-custom-faces)
```

### Changes to the manual

* Added a missing parenthesis to a sample code block.  Thanks to Paul
  David for the contribution in pull request 39 on the GitHub mirror:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/pull/39>.

* Clarified the wording of individual statements pertaining to the need
  of reloading a theme for changes to user options to become effective.
