---
title: "Emacs: denote version 0.1.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.  Below are the release notes.

* * *

The present entry is intended for early adopters of Denote who may have
not caught up with the latest developments.  Prospective users are
advised to read the manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>.  For
a video demonstration: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.

-   The `denote` package on GNU ELPA will be available a few hours after
    this release.  GNU ELPA provides the latest stable release.  To use a
    development snapshot, read:
    <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-05-13-emacs-elpa-devel/>.

-   Remember that any significant contribution (above ~15 lines) requires
    copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation.  A form with
    instructions is included in the manual's "Contributing" section:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:1ebe4865-c001-4747-a6f2-0fe45aad71cd>.

-   The front matter of notes in Org has changed to be compliant with the
    standard `org-id` infrastructure.  A `PROPERTIES` drawer is added to
    the top of the file, which includes an `ID` property with the value of
    the Denote identifier.  Sample:

        :PROPERTIES:
        :ID:          20220610T202537
        :END:
        #+title:      Sample Org front matter
        #+date:       2022-06-10
        #+filetags:   denote  testing

-   The front matter of Markdown (YAML or TOML) and plain text files
    remains constant.  For completeness, this is how they look:

        ---
        title:      "Sample with Markdown and YAML"
        date:       2022-06-10
        tags:       denote  testing
        identifier: "20220610T202021"
        ---

        +++
        title      = "Sample with Markdown and TOML"
        date       = 2022-06-10
        tags       = ["denote", "testing"]
        identifier = "20220610T201510"
        +++

        title:      Sample plain text
        date:       2022-06-10
        tags:       denote  testing
        identifier: 20220610T202232
        ---------------------------

-   The integration with `org-id` extends to how linking works.  By
    default, Denote uses its own custom hyperlink type which starts with
    the `denote:` prefix.  In Org, it works like the `file:` type.  When
    the user option `denote-link-use-org-id` is non-nil, links from Org
    notes to other Org notes will use the standard `id:` type instead.  As
    this is an Org-specific feature, Denote takes care to use the
    major-mode-agnostic `denote:` type when the link targets a non-Org
    note.

-   In Org files the links created by Denote are buttonized automatically.
    For Markdown and plain text, we use our own methods.  When a link is
    inserted it is buttonized outright.  To buttonize links in existing
    notes while visiting them in a buffer, add/evaluate this (it excludes
    Org on its own):

        (add-hook 'find-file-hook #'denote-link-buttonize-buffer)

-   The generation of the backlinks' buffer now uses the built-in `xref`
    library instead of relying on a hardcoded call to the `find`
    executable.  This means that the `denote-link-backlinks` command will,
    in principle, work properly with all Emacs builds.

-   Users of Emacs 28 or higher can configure `xref-search-program` to
    change from the default `grep` to `ripgrep`, `ugrep`, or a
    user-defined alternative.

-   This is the first stable release of Denote.  It covers close to 400
    commits starting from 2022-06-04.  Denote is the successor to a toy
    package of mine, USLS, whose first public version was made available
    in early November 2020: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/usls>.

-   Thanks to everyone involved in the development of Denote.  Code
    contributions, bug reports, discussion of ideas, are all valuable.
    From A-Z the names mentioned in the manual's "Acknowledgements"
    section: Colin McLear, Damien Cassou, Frank Ehmsen, Jack Baty,
    Kaushal Modi, Peter Povinec, Sven Seebeck, Ypot.

-   Sources of Denote:
    -   Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
    -   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
    -   Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
    -   Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
        -   Mirrors:
            -   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
            -   GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
    -   Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
