---
title: "Emacs: denote version 1.2.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Denote now requires Emacs version 28.1 or higher

With the help of Noboru Ota (nobiot), we realised that Denote was
broken on Emacs 27 for quite a while.  The fact that we received no
feedback about it suggests that this change is the best course of
action going forward.  Discussion:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C86r0yvzm12.fsf%40nobiot.com%3E#%3C86sfja78ik.fsf@nobiot.com%3E>

Emacs 27 lacks certain Xref facilities that we need for the
backlinking facility.  It was holding us back for no good reason,
while also adding to the maintenance burden.

If you are using Denote on Emacs 27 and things are working for you,
there is no need to update the package.  Do it when you also upgrade
Emacs to a newer version.


## Display context in backlinks' buffer

By default, the generic backlinks' buffer, which can be displayed with
the command `denote-link-backlinks` (alias `denote-link-show-backlinks-buffer`),
only shows the file names of the linked notes.

We have made it possible to produce a more informative view by showing
the context of the link and also listing all links per file.  This is
done by setting the user option `denote-backlinks-show-context` to a
non-nil value.

To illustrate the difference, this is the default backlinks' buffer:

    Backlinks to "On being honest" (20220614T130812)
    ------------------------------------------------

    20220614T145606--let-this-glance-become-a-stare__journal.txt
    20220616T182958--feeling-butterflies-in-your-stomach__journal.txt

And this is the one with `denote-backlinks-show-context` enabled:

    Backlinks to "On being honest" (20220614T130812)
    ------------------------------------------------

    20220614T145606--let-this-glance-become-a-stare__journal.txt
    37: growing into it: [[denote:20220614T130812][On being honest]].
    64: As I said in [[denote:20220614T130812][On being honest]] I have never
    20220616T182958--feeling-butterflies-in-your-stomach__journal.txt
    62: indifference.  In [[denote:20220614T130812][On being honest]] I alluded

Granted, here we show plain text though in Emacs the results have the
appropriate colours of the active theme and are easier to read.

Thanks to Noboru Ota (nobiot) for implementing this feature.  We
discussed it at length on the mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C86r0yvzm12.fsf%40nobiot.com%3E>.

Noboru has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


## Dynamic Org blocks for lists of Denote links

Denote now includes the `denote-org-dblock` library.  Activate it
thus:

```elisp
;; Register Denote's Org dynamic blocks
(require 'denote-org-dblock)
```

A dynamic block gets its contents by evaluating a given function,
depending on the type of block.  The type of block and its parameters
are stated in the opening `#+BEGIN` line of the block.  Typing `C-c
C-c` with point on that line runs the function, with the given
arguments, and populates the block's contents accordingly.

What Denote has is ways to write blocks that produce a list of links
matching a given regular expression while conforming with some other
parameters.  The manual explains how to use this powerful feature
(which is necessarily specific to the Org file type):
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:8b542c50-dcc9-4bca-8037-a36599b22779>.

Thanks to Elias Storms for authoring `denote-org-dblock` and for
discussing this issue at length with me on the mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm2sfisexx7.fsf%40MBA21.fritz.box%3E>.

Elias has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


## Integration with the built-in project.el and xref.el libraries

Denote was already using Xref internally but has now gained more
capabilities which help it find files more effectively.  With the help
of Emacs' standard project library, all file-related prompts (e.g. to
add a link) search all items in the `denote-directory` regardless of
whether the user is in a subdirectory or not.

All Denote commands benefit from this refactoring.  One such request
to "Make `denote-open-or-create` work better across subfolders" was
made in issue 114 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/114>.

Thanks to Noboru Ota (nobiot) for introducing this feature together
with a new system of "modules" for incorporating additional built-in
functionality:

-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C86a64ooxyi.fsf%40nobiot.com%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C86k03f4iq6.fsf%40nobiot.com%3E>

I will not document the new user option `denote-modules` right now as
my ongoing job search prevented me from exploring the full potential
of this feature.  I promise to do it for the next version of Denote
and update the manual accordingly.  Nevertheless, the doc string of
`denote-modules` already provides all one needs to get started.


## Re-use last input in "do or create" commands

The commands `denote-open-or-create`, `denote-link-or-create` first
prompt for an existing note.  If they find it, they act on it,
otherwise they prompt for the creation of a new note to operate on.

At the first prompt, it is common to use regular expressions and
out-of-order pattern matching (such as with the `orderless` package),
so the input can be something like `_test ^2022 some title`, which we
obviously don't want to automatically reuse as the new note's actual
title.

To this end, and to accommodate all workflows, we leverage Emacs'
minibuffer history to make the last input accessible with `M-p` at the
minibuffer prompt (`M-x previous-history-element`).  The text is
available for further editing before it is submitted as the new note's
title.  Simple, effective, and flexible!

Thanks to Guo Yong for starting the discussion that led me to this
improvement:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3CNF6pFBq--3-9%40tutanota.com%3E>.


## Add support for any file type

Denote provides the user option `denote-file-type` which specifies the
file type to use for new notes.  Options include Org mode (the
default), Markdown+YAML, Markdown+TOML, and plain text.  Furthermore,
there exists the convenience command `denote-type` (alias
`denote-create-note-using-type`) which prompts for a file type to use
when creating a new note (I normally write in plain text, but
sometimes switch to Org or Markdown).

The variable `denote-file-types` (which is NOT a user option)
specifies all the parameters of what a "file type" means, such as how
to format its front matter, what style of date+time to use, which file
type extension to write, how to rename the file, what style of link to
apply, and so on.  Advanced users can now edit this variable to either
register new file types or redefine the behaviour of existing ones.
Read this comprehensive guide on how to do it:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-10-30-demo-denote-custom-file-type/>.

I repeat: this is for advanced users or, anyhow, for those who are
prepared to maintain some custom code in their setup.  The guide is
accessible though and I am always willing to help anyone in need of
assistance.

A relevant request for such a feature can be found in issue 86 on the
GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/86>.

The `denote-file-types` were introduced by Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay in
pull request 89 at the GitHub mirror and were part of Denote version
0.6.0: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/89>.  I have made
lots of changes since then to make all parts of Denote work with it
and to parameterise its various facets.


## Exclude certain directories from all operations

The user option `denote-excluded-directories-regexp` instructs all
Denote functions that read or check file/directory names to omit
directories that match the given regular expression.  The regexp needs
to match only the name of the directory, not its full path.

Affected operations include file prompts and functions that return the
available files in the `denote-directory`.  File prompts are used by
several commands, such as `denote-link` and `denote-subdirectory`.
Functions that check for files include `denote-directory-files` and
`denote-directory-subdirectories`.

Thanks to Graham Marlow for the contribution which was done in pull
request 112 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/112>.

The original contribution, with the subsequent tweaks I made to it, is
within the eligible line count and thus does not require copyright
assignment to the Free Software Foundation.


## Exclude certain keywords from being inferred

The user option `denote-excluded-keywords-regexp` omits keywords that
match a regular expression from the list of inferred keywords.

Keywords are inferred from file names and provided at relevant prompts
as completion candidates when the user option `denote-infer-keywords`
is non-nil.

Thanks to Stefan Thesing for proposing this idea in issue 115 on the
GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/115>.

[ Other people participate in that thread and there may be something
  more coming out of it. ]


## Use the `citar-denote` package for bibliography notes

Peter Prevos has produced the `citar-denote` package which makes it
possible to write notes on BibTeX entries with the help of the `citar`
package.  These notes have the citation's unique key associated with
them in the file's front matter.  They also get a configurable keyword
in their file name, making it easy to find them in Dired and/or
retrieve them with the various Denote methods.

With `citar-denote`, the user leverages standard minibuffer completion
mechanisms (e.g. with the help of the `vertico` and `embark` packages)
to manage bibliographic notes and access those notes with ease.  The
package's documentation covers the details: <https://github.com/pprevos/citar-denote/>.

Thanks to Peter Prevos for developing this package and for mentioning
it on the Denote mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C877cz0e96r.fsf%40prevos.net%3E>.


## New functions and variables for developers

Developers or users who maintain custom code now have access to:

-   Function `denote-keywords-sort`
-   Function `denote-keywords-prompt`

Plus all the following which are related to the aforementioned `denote-file-types`:

-   Variable `denote-org-link-format`
-   Variable `denote-md-link-format`
-   Variable `denote-id-only-link-format`
-   Variable `denote-org-link-in-context-regexp`
-   Variable `denote-md-link-in-context-regexp`
-   Variable `denote-id-only-link-in-context-regexp`
-   Function `denote-date-org-timestamp`
-   Function `denote-date-rfc3339`
-   Function `denote-date-iso-8601`

Again, users can implement support for ANY FILE TYPE and use it to
write notes in, either as their default choice or on-demand.  If
anything, this highlights the flexibility of Denote.


## Miscellaneous

-   Added the `denote-keywords-sort` function.  The intent is to
    abstract the task of sorting the keywords.  Before, it was handled
    by the `denote-keywords-prompt`, which meant that keywords were not
    sorted when the `denote` function was called from Lisp.  Thanks to
    Florian for bringing this matter to my attention, providing relevant
    feedback, and fixing an omission of mine in `denote-rename-file`:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C166689879712.8.6808878344988686135.71824507%40aboulafia.org%3E>.

-   Expanded the manual's entry on directory "silos" to include more
    code examples.  Thanks to Viktor Haag for asking a question on the
    mailing list that inspired me to produce this entry:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3CCANnkwC6NLd0VneUEqFrjh7TCUBLBgEtLCcPwM37JDvJXJCShVQ%40mail.gmail.com%3E>.

-   Included a section in the manual with a non-exhaustive list of
    references to publications about Denote.  As of this writing, it
    includes entries from David Wilson (SystemCrafters), Jack Baty,
    Jeremy Friesen, and Peter Prevos.  If you have an article about
    Denote, please contact me about it directly or on the Denote mailing
    list and I will add it to the manual.

-   Tweaked how Org's HTML export produces links in order to avoid
    broken subdirectory paths.  Thanks to Thibaut Benjamin for the
    contribution, which was done in pull request 116 on the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/116>.

    The change concerns a single line and thus Thibaut requires no
    copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Expanded the manual where necessary.
