---
title: "Emacs: denote version 1.0.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote is a simple note-taking tool.  It is based on the idea that notes
should follow a predictable and descriptive file-naming scheme.  The
file name must offer a clear indication of what the note is about,
without reference to any other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines
the creation of such files while providing facilities to link between
them.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

This is the first major release of Denote.  A part of the changes
documented herein is for advanced users or developers who wish to
extend Denote with their custom code.  Though we first cover what
applies to everyone.


## Changes for all users

-   The custom Org hyperlink type of `denote:` can be visited from
    outside the `denote-directory`.  We now provide the necessary glue
    code that Org needs to store these `denote:` links.  Storing them
    can be done with an `org-capture` template or via the command
    `org-store-link`.  Use this to, for example, capture a TODO that
    references one of your notes.
    
    `denote:` links work for as long as the referenced file is somewhere
    in the `denote-directory` or one of its subdirectories.
    
    Thanks to Marc Fargas for the contribution.  Marc did not need to
    assign copyright to the Free Software Foundation, as the patch was
    within the ~15 line limit that is permissible.
    
    The contribution was discussed on the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/35137>.  A prior
    exchange took place in issue 104 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/104>.
    
    Some further tweaks were made to the relevant function.  Thanks to
    Elias Storms for reporting on the mailing list a bug which revealed
    a regression I introduced to the Org link storing mechanism:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C15D55F4B-64D1-4083-AD5E-B5BACA8F1909%40ap.be%3E>.

-   Following from above, the command `denote-link-find-file` finds
    files reliably, regardless of where the link is stored.  All it
    needs is for the target file to be inside the `denote-directory`.
    
    I discovered this while exchanging views with Marc Fargas regarding
    the aforementioned patch: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/35137>.

-   The command `denote-link-buttonize-buffer`, which "buttonizes"
    `denote:` links in plain text and Markdown files, now performs its
    task regardless of where the current file is stored.  Those links
    work for as long as the file they reference is somewhere inside the
    `denote-directory`.

-   The commands `denote-link-after-creating`, `denote-link-or-create`
    provide a convenience for users who need to create link to notes
    that may not exist yet.  The idea is that one is expounding on a
    given topic and wants to create a link to a relevant issue.  They
    are not sure if they have written anything about it yet, so they
    invoke the relevant command.  Consult their doc strings or read the
    manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:9e41e7df-2aac-4835-94c5-659b6111e6de>.
    
    Thanks to user sienic for suggesting the idea and for testing the
    prototypes.  And thanks to Juanjo Presa for participating in the
    discussion to share the view that this functionality should be part of
    denote.el.  This happened in issue 96 over at the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/96>.

-   The command `denote-open-or-create` offers the convenience of
    visiting a file, if it exists, else prompting for its creation.
    Thanks to Alan Schmitt for the contribution.  The patch was sent on
    the mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87fsgvddny.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>.
    It is within the limit of what is allowed without assigning
    copyright to the Free Software Foundation, though Alan has done the
    relevant paperwork.

-   The manual expands on two sections: (1) Variants of
    `denote-open-or-create`, (2) Variants of `denote-link-or-create`.
    They show how one can use the above "do or create" commands with
    different permutations of the Denote prompts for new note creation.

-   The manual includes a section titled "Create a note with the
    region's contents".  Quote:
    
    > Sometimes it makes sense to gather notes in a single file and later
    > review it to make multiple notes out of it.  With the following
    > code, the user marks a region and then invokes the command
    > `my-denote-create-new-note-from-region`: it prompts for a title and
    > keywords and then uses the region's contents to fill in the newly
    > created note.
    
    This is not part of denote.el, though we provide it in the manual
    for users that may need it.  Thanks to sundar bp for suggesting the
    idea.  This was done via a private channel and the information is
    shared with permission.

-   The manual has another entry titled "Split an Org subtree into its
    own note", which is similar to the above idea of using the region's
    contents but has some extra niceties provided by Org.  Quote:
    
    > With Org files in particular, it is common to have nested headings which
    > could be split off into their own standalone notes.  In Org parlance an
    > entry with all its subheadings is a "subtree".  With the following code,
    > the user places the point inside the heading they want to split off and
    > invokes the command `my-denote-split-org-subtree`.  It will create a
    > note using the heading's text and tags for the new file.  The contents
    > of the subtree become the contents of the new note and are removed from
    > the old one.
    
    Thanks to Sven Seebeck for suggesting the idea and for testing my
    prototypes.  This information is shared with permission, as it was
    provided via a private channel.

-   The manual describes how a user can leverage the built-in
    `dired-virtual-mode` to perform arbitrary sorting of their list of
    notes.  It also includes code for Eshell to quickly "export" a
    command's output into a dedicated buffer (which can then be used to
    derive a "virtual" Dired).  Thanks to Yi Liu for asking the question
    that inspired this entry:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C1C75FF01-EC76-49DF-9AEB-ED718A2795FF@gmail.com%3E>.

-   The `denote-faces-broken-link` has been removed.  It was used for
    Org links.  The idea was to apply a different style if the link was
    broken.  However, the way fontification works means that there may
    be a performance penalty as Org tries to check again and again if
    the link is broken or note.  As `denote:` links are robust (unless
    the user tries to break them), this penalty is unacceptable.  Thanks
    to Peter Prevos for reporting the issue and discussing it with me on
    the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87k05umyyo.fsf%40prevos.net%3E>.

-   The "denote" group in Custom UI buffers now provides a link to the
    Info manual that is shipped with the package.  To read the manual,
    evaluate `(info "(denote) Top")`.  Else visit the official web page:
    <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>.

-   Fixed a case where an internal check for a note would throw an error
    if the buffer was not visiting a file.  Thanks to Hilde Rhyne was
    the patch: it is below the ~15 line threshold and thus does not
    require copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation.  The
    issue was discussed on the mailing list and was pushed to users as
    version `0.6.1`:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm035d7nq22.fsf%40disroot.org%3E>.

-   When linking to a file that has no front matter, Denote tries to use
    the TITLE component of the file name (per our file-naming scheme) as
    the link's descriptive text.  We now make this look a bit better, by
    capitalising only the first letter while dehyphenating the text,
    converting `this-is-a-test` to `This is a test`.  Before, we would
    capitalise all words.  Thanks to Clemens Radermacher for the patch.
    It was sent via a private channel.  Clemens has assigned copyright
    to the Free Software Foundation.


## Changes for developers or advanced users

Lots of functions and variables which once were for "private" use (the
presence of double hyphens in the symbol) are now made public.
Concretely this means that they no longer have double hyphens in their
name and we pledge to support them henceforth.  "Support" means that
we (i) consider them stable, (ii) document them properly, (iii) will
record any changes made to them such as in a change log, a blog post
on my website, and via `make-obsolete`.

The manual provides a complete reference of what is on offer.  The
section is titled "For developers or advanced users":
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:c916d8c5-540a-409f-b780-6ccbd90e088e>.

Normally, we do not support private forms and can delete/modify them
without notice.  However, I decided to write obsoletion aliases for
all forms I made public or otherwise revised, in an effort not to
break any existing custom code.  The following table covers all
obsolete symbols and their new counterparts.  PLEASE UPDATE YOUR CODE
as those aliases will be removed in the near future.

<table border="2" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="6" rules="groups" frame="hsides">


<colgroup>
<col  class="org-right" />

<col  class="org-left" />

<col  class="org-left" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col" class="org-right">Index</th>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">Old symbol</th>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">New symbol</th>
</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>
<tr>
<td class="org-right">1</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;id-format</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-id-format</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">2</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;id-regexp</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-id-regexp</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">3</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;title-regexp</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-title-regexp</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">4</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;keywords-regexp</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-keywords-regexp</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">5</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;punctuation-regexp</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-excluded-punctuation-regexp</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">6</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-punctuation-excluded-extra-regexp</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-excluded-punctuation-extra-regexp</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">7</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;sluggify</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-sluggify</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">8</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;sluggify-and-join</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-sluggify-and-join</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">9</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;sluggify-keywords</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-sluggify-keywords</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">10</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;desluggify</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-desluggify</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">11</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;only-note-p</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-file-is-note-p</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">12</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;file-has-identifier-p</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-file-has-identifier-p</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">13</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;file-supported-extension-p</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-file-has-supported-extension-p</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">14</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;writable-and-supported-p</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-file-is-writable-and-supported-p</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">15</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;file-name-relative-to-denote-directory</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-get-file-name-relative-to-denote-directory</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">16</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-link&#x2013;id-from-string</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-extract-id-from-string</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">17</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;directory-files</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-directory-files</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">18</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;subdirs</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-directory-subdirectories</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">19</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;get-note-path-by-id</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-get-path-by-id</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">20</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;directory-files-matching-regexp</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-directory-files-matching-regexp</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">21</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-read-file-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-file-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">22</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;extract-keywords-from-path</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-extract-keywords-from-path</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">23</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;keywords-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-keywords-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">24</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-filename-identifier</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-filename-identifier</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">25</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;file-name-id</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-or-create-file-identifier</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">26</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-filename-title</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-filename-title</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">27</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-title-value</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-title-value</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">28</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-title-line</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-title-line</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">29</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-keywords-value</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-keywords-value</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">30</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;retrieve-keywords-line</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-retrieve-keywords-line</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">31</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;format-file</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-format-file-name</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">32</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;barf-duplicate-id</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-barf-duplicate-id</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">33</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;title-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-title-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">34</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;file-type-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-file-type-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">35</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;date-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-date-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">36</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;subdirs-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-subdirectory-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">37</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;template-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-template-prompt</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">38</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;filetype-heuristics</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-filetype-heuristics</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">39</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;rename-file</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-rename-file-and-buffer</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-right">40</td>
<td class="org-left">denote&#x2013;rename-file-prompt</td>
<td class="org-left">denote-rename-file-prompt</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

If you are writing code that extends Denote and feel that something is
either missing or has remained private, please contact us on the
mailing list, the GitHub/GitLab mirror, or send me an email directly.
I always respond in a timely fashion.


## Open to everyone

The most common feedback I get about Denote is that its documentation
is good.  As you can tell from these change logs, the plan is to
continue on this path.

Please note that the communication channels for Denote (mailing list,
mirrors, my personal email) are open to users of all levels.  Do not
hesitate to contact us/me.

Thanks again to everyone for their contributions, direct or indirect,
either in the form of code or the discussion of ideas.  Quoting from
the "Acknowledgements" section of the manual (all my packages have
such a section):

> Denote is meant to be a collective effort.  Every bit of help matters.
> 
> -   **Author/maintainer:** Protesilaos Stavrou.
> 
> -   **Contributions to code or the manual:** Abin Simon, Alan Schmitt,
>     Benjamin Kästner, Clemens Radermacher, Colin McLear, Damien Cassou,
>     Eshel Yaron, Hilde Rhyne, Jack Baty, Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay, Jürgen
>     Hötzel, Kaushal Modi, Kyle Meyer, Marc Fargas, Peter Prevos, Philip
>     Kaludercic, Quiliro Ordóñez, Stefan Monnier.
> 
> -   **Ideas and/or user feedback:** Abin Simon, Alan Schmitt, Alfredo
>     Borrás, Benjamin Kästner, Colin McLear, Damien Cassou, Elias Storms,
>     Frank Ehmsen, Hanspeter Gisler, Jack Baty, Juanjo Presa, Kaushal
>     Modi, M. Hadi Timachi, Paul van Gelder, Peter Prevos, Shreyas
>     Ragavan, Summer Emacs, Sven Seebeck, Taoufik, Yi Liu, Ypot, atanasj,
>     hpgisler, pRot0ta1p, sienic, sundar bp.
> 
> Special thanks to Peter Povinec who helped refine the file-naming
> scheme, which is the cornerstone of this project.
> 
> Special thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the numerous
> contributions to the code base.

