---
title: 'Emacs: logos version 0.3.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my logos package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Logos is a small package that provides the means for a simple focus mode
utilising page breaks or outline headings.  [Watch the demo of
logos.el](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-11-emacs-logos-demo/)
and refer to [the manual](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos) for the
relevant details.  That page also includes links to the GitLab repo and
its mirror on GitHub.

Below is the change log entry.

* * *

## Version 0.3.0 on 2022-03-30

This release basically contains one major refinement about how buffer
narrowing is handled.  In detail:

1.  If `logos-outlines-are-pages` is non-nil, it now includes the match
    of the `page-delimiter` regexp in the narrowed region and leaves
    point right after the `page-delimiter`&#x2014;so in Org mode, after the
    stars.  (It is better to leave point there than at the very beginning
    of the narrowed buffer to match the behavior of
    `logos-forward-page-dwim` when the buffer is not narrowed.)  The
    inclusion of the delimiter helps retain any folding functionality
    associated with that line (e.g. Org headings).

2.  To avoid skipping pages in the narrowed case when point is at their
    outer boundaries, `logos` checks if you are right at the start of a
    `page-delimiter` and if so moves past the delimiter in the opposite
    direction of the given motion: so if you are moving back, it puts you
    after the delimiter, and if you are moving forward it puts you before
    the delimiter.  (The bug was that if the point was at `point-max`
    while narrowed and moving forward, it would skip past a page and the
    same in the opposite direction with `point-min`.)

3.  Changed `logos-narrow-dwim` to call `logos--narrow-to-page` instead
    of `narrow-to-page`, so that it too includes the `page-delimiter`
    match in the page.

4.  The `logos--page-p` now always checks for the right delimiter, which
    may be that of the outline if `logos-outlines-are-pages` is non-nil.
    Whereas before it was hard-coded to the generic `page-delimiter`.

Thanks to Omar Antolín Camarena for commit
`8c2e85033db982ef13a5e041012dc45d86d9de32` which covers the first three
of the aforementioned points.  The contribution was sent as a patch via
email.  Omar has already assigned copyright to the Free Software
Foundation.
