---
title: 'Emacs: pulsar version 0.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my pulsar package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Pulsar is a small package that temporarily highlights the current line,
either on demand or automatically after invoking a function that is
present in a user-defined list.  [Watch the
demo](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-14-emacs-pulsar-demo/) and
consult [the manual](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar) for the
technicalities.  That page also includes links to the GitLab repo and
its mirror on GitHub.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 0.2.0 on 2022-03-16

-   Fixed an inconsistency that was present when Emacs was running in a
    server-client model where the highlight would never pulse but instead
    remain fixed in place until another command was invoked.  By default,
    the pulse effect should now work for that use-case.  Thanks to Mark
    Barton, Petter Storvik, and user kb for their feedback in issue 1:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/pulsar/-/issues/1>.

-   Implemented the `pulsar-highlight-line` command and abstracted the
    relevant code.  Unlike `pulsar-pulse-line`, it never pulses the
    current line.  Instead it keeps the highlight in place until another
    command is invoked.  Thanks to Mark Barton for proposing this in
    issue 1.

-   Introduced the user option `pulsar-pulse` which determines whether
    pulsar should use a pulse effect (notwithstanding the aforementioned
    new command).  When its value is non-nil (the default) pulsing takes
    place.  Thanks to Petter Storvik for suggesting this approach in
    issue 1.

-   Added the user option `pulsar-iterations` which controls how smooth or
    abrupt the pulse effect is.  This complements the existing variable
    `pulsar-delay`.  Both apply only when `pulsar-pulse` is non-nil.

-   Wrote the `pulsar-generic` face and made it the default value of the
    `pulsar-face` user option.  This is consistent with the original
    design of a theme-agnostic presentation, though now it ensures that
    the `:extend` attribute is used to stretch the highlight to the edge
    of the window (without it and depending on the theme, the highlight
    would only reach the last character on the line).

-   Updated the manual to reflect those changes.
