---
title: 'Emacs: tmr version 0.4.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my TMR package for GNU Emacs.'
---

TMR is an Emacs package that provides facilities for setting timers
using a convenient notation.  Lots of commands are available to operate
on timers, while there also exists a tabulated view to display all
timers in a nice grid.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `tmr`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/tmr>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/tmr>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/tmr>

* * *

The general theme of this release is that TMR became simpler, better,
and more robust.  Daniel Mendler provided lots of patches and is now
recognised as co-author of the package together with Damien Cassou and
me (Protesilaos).  With the exception of documentation changes and other
accompanying tweaks, all of the following are courtesy of Daniel
Mendler.  Consult the git log for the minutia.

-   Timers can also be set using an absolute time input.  For example,
    `21:45` will set a timer from now until the specified time.  The
    familiar ways of starting timers with relative values, work as they
    did before.  This is part of a wider internal revision to make the
    parsing of input more strict.

-   TMR no longer maintains distinct feature sets between its minibuffer
    and tabulated interfaces.  What works in one context, works equally in
    the other.  All commands that were formerly available only in the
    `tmr-tabulated-mode` (accessed via `tmr-tabulated-view`) are now
    implemented anew to provide the requisite minibuffer capabilities.
    When called from inside the `tmr-tabulated-mode`, the commands operate
    on the timer at point.  Otherwise they prompt for completion among the
    available timers (where relevant).  This covers all operations for
    creating, cloning, [re-]describing, rescheduling, and removing timers.
    The `tmr-tabulated-mode-map` is updated thus:
    
        (defvar tmr-tabulated-mode-map
          (let ((map (make-sparse-keymap)))
            (define-key map "k" #'tmr-remove)
            (define-key map "r" #'tmr-remove)
            (define-key map "R" #'tmr-remove-finished)
            (define-key map "+" #'tmr)
            (define-key map "t" #'tmr)
            (define-key map "*" #'tmr-with-description)
            (define-key map "T" #'tmr-with-description)
            (define-key map "c" #'tmr-clone)
            (define-key map "e" #'tmr-edit-description)
            (define-key map "s" #'tmr-reschedule)
            map)
          "Keybindings for `tmr-tabulated-mode-map'.")
    
    Similarly, our sample key bindings are these:
    
        ;; OPTIONALLY set your own global key bindings:
        (let ((map global-map))
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t t") #'tmr)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t T") #'tmr-with-description)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t l") #'tmr-tabulated-view) ; "list timers" mnemonic
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t c") #'tmr-clone)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t k") #'tmr-cancel)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t s") #'tmr-reschedule)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t e") #'tmr-edit-description)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t r") #'tmr-remove)
          (define-key map (kbd "C-c t R") #'tmr-remove-finished))

-   The tabulated view now shows the remaining time for all timer objects.
    This is how the `*tmr-tabulated-view*` buffer is formatted:
    
        Start      End        Remaining  Description
        10:11:49   10:11:54   ✔
        10:11:36   10:31:36   19m 35s
        10:11:32   10:26:32   14m 31s    Yet another test
        10:11:16   10:21:16   9m 14s     Testing how it works

-   All timer objects are refactored to expose a properly formatted
    completion table.  The completion category is `tmr-timer`.  In
    practical terms, `embark` (and other standards-compliant packages) can
    operate on them.  The manual provides sample glue code for Embark:
    
        (defvar tmr-action-map
          (let ((map (make-sparse-keymap)))
            (define-key map "k" #'tmr-remove)
            (define-key map "r" #'tmr-remove)
            (define-key map "R" #'tmr-remove-finished)
            (define-key map "c" #'tmr-clone)
            (define-key map "e" #'tmr-edit-description)
            (define-key map "s" #'tmr-reschedule)
            map))
        
        (with-eval-after-load 'embark
          (add-to-list 'embark-keymap-alist '(tmr-timer . tmr-action-map))
          (cl-loop
           for cmd the key-bindings of tmr-action-map
           if (commandp cmd) do
           (add-to-list 'embark-post-action-hooks (list cmd 'embark--restart))))
    
    The [Embark Wiki](https://github.com/oantolin/embark/wiki/Additional-Actions#actions-for-prots-tmr-tmr-may-ring) is updated accordingly.

-   The new user option `tmr-confirm-single-timer` governs how TMR should
    behave while operating on the sole timer.  If non-nil (the default),
    TMR will always use the minibuffer to select a timer object to operate
    on, even when there is only one candidate available.  If set to nil,
    TMR will not ask for confirmation when there is one timer available:
    the operation will be carried out outright.  The default value is
    optimal for use with Embark.

-   The existing user option `tmr-description-list` is revised to accept
    either a list of strings (the old approach) or a symbol of a variable
    that holds a list of strings.  In the latter case, this can be the
    `tmr-description-history`, which is a variable that stores the user's
    input at the relevant minibuffer prompt.  We have made this the new
    default value, as it grows naturally to reflect one's usage of TMR.
    Minibuffer histories can persist between sessions if the user enables
    the built-in `savehist` library.  Sample configuration:
    
        (require 'savehist)
        (setq savehist-file (locate-user-emacs-file "savehist"))
        (setq history-length 10000)
        (setq history-delete-duplicates t)
        (setq savehist-save-minibuffer-history t)
        (add-hook 'after-init-hook #'savehist-mode)

-   Fixed an edge case where a `when-let*` form did not return the
    expected value.  Thanks to Nathan R. DeGruchy for the patch.  The
    patch is below the ~15 line threshold and thus does not require
    copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Named the mailing list address as the `Maintainer:` of Denote.
    Together with the other package headers, they help the user find our
    primary sources and/or communication channels.  This change conforms
    with work being done upstream in package.el by Philip Kaludercic.  I
    was informed about it here:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues/%3C875ykl84yi.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>.

-   Updated the manual to reflect the aforementioned.

