---
title: 'Emacs: modus-themes version 4.1.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published the latest stable release of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The change log
entry is reproduced further below.  It is a long read.  For any
questions, feel welcome to [contact me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will install the changes in emacs.git so please wait a little longer
for the updates to trickle down to you.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `modus-themes` (also built into Emacs 28+)
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-changelog>
+ Colour palette: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-colors>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Backronym: My Old Display Unexpectedly Sharpened ... themes

* * *

## Recursive semantic colour mapping

Version 4 of the Modus themes changed how all colour-related
customisations are done.  Instead of multiple user options with
hard-coded stylistic presets, users have access to a comprehensive
system of "named colours" and "semantic colour mappings".  The former
is an association between a name, like `blue-warmer`, and a colour
value such as `#3548cf`.  While semantic colour mappings are
associations between syntactic/interface constructs and named colours,
such as what value level 2 headings have.

When overriding the palette users can now define semantic colour
mappings whose value is another such mapping.  This recursion
simplifies how multiple overrides are defined.

The manual offers extensive guidance on the topic of palette
overrides.  There are many sections that include code samples that are
ready for use.

The addition of recursive semantic colour mappings solves a problem
reported by Imran Khan on the mailing list where they were trying to
do what made sense (recursion) but the old code did not permit as
much:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cb7ca4702162fd575593f8ded28d9a888.contact%40imrankhan.live%3E>.

I was aware of that constraint from before the release of version
4.0.0 but was hesitant to implement recursion prior to getting some
feedback on the new palette overriding feature.

Also thanks to Christian Tietze for participating in that discussion
on the mailing list.


## Extract an arbitrary colour from a given theme's palette

I formalised the function `modus-themes-get-color-value` and
documented it at length.  It accepts a `COLOR` argument, which
represents an entry in the palette (named colour or semantic colour
value), as well as optional `OVERRIDES` and `THEME` arguments.  When
`OVERRIDES` is non-nil, `modus-themes-get-color-value` will read from
the overrides, otherwise it will only consult the default palette
value.  The `THEME` argument specifies which theme's palette to use.
In the absence of `THEME`, the current one is used.

I already had the "get colour" functionality internally, but was
inspired to make it public after checking Sacha Chua's blog post
"Making highlight-sexp follow modus-themes-toggle":
<https://sachachua.com/blog/2023/01/making-highlight-sexp-follow-modus-themes-toggle/>.
Sacha was using a private function from the themes, which would have
been problematic if I would ever move things around.

Remember to read the documentation of `modus-themes-list-colors`.
That command shows a preview of the named colours.  When called with a
prefix argument (`C-u` by default), it shows a preview of the semantic
colour mappings.


## Option to disable other themes while loading Modus

In the past, we used to disable all other themes while loading a Modus
theme.  I revised this for version 4 because I learnt that some users
use "themes" as bundles of arbitrary configurations.

With the addition of the `modus-themes-disable-other-themes` user
option, which is non-nil by default, I am restoring the old behaviour:
when loading a Modus theme all other themes are disabled.

This happens when the theme is loaded with the commands
`modus-themes-toggle` and `modus-themes-select`, or via Lisp with the
function `modus-themes-load-theme`.

Users who need to run multiple themes can set this option to a nil
value.  (Personally, I use minor modes for such stylistic bundles and
never have to worry about `(mapc #'disable-theme custom-enabled-themes)`.)

Thanks to Tony Zorman for the feedback on the mailing list, which led
me to the introduction of this user option:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C874jtew0gp.fsf%40hyperspace%3E#%3C87bkne84d2.fsf@hyperspace%3E>.


## Renamed the named colours for bg-{added,changed,removed}-intense

They are now called `bg-added-fringe`, `bg-changed-fringe`,
`bg-removed-fringe`.  Please update any palette overrides to reflect
this renaming.


## Documented how to override diffs for more optional combinations

The manual includes details (with copy-pastable code) on how to
achieve foreground-only diffs and/or how to have red+blue diffs
instead of the default red+green or the deuteranopia yellow+blue.

Thanks to Andrew Tropin for requesting this feature.  We used to
provide this style in earlier versions of the themes, but now it is
much more flexible.  Andrew's request was done via a private channel
and the information is shared with permission.

[ Since we are here, also thanks to Andrew for keeping the Guix
  package of the Modus themes up to date. ]


## Stylistic changes

-   Guaranteed consistency between all of the line-related faces of the
    `consult` package.  We use the `shadow` face in all interfaces where
    line numbers are contextual information (Occur, Grep,&#x2026;).  With
    Consult, this was not the case for commands like `consult-line`.

    Thanks to Daniel Mendler (also known as @minad) for bringing this
    matter to my attention:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3Cb03413a6-cb77-615d-145d-db4eb710bfca%40daniel-mendler.de%3E>.

-   Refined all diff colours for fringes and reduced the saturation for
    added lines in `modus-operandi-deuteranopia`, `modus-vivendi-deuteranopia-theme`.
    Thanks to Andrew Tropin for showing me some usability issues with
    the previous styles.  This was done via a private channel and the
    information is shared with permission.

-   Instructed the `dashboard` icons to retain their underlying colour.
    The default value of the `dashboard-items-face` made all icons use
    the same colour, detracting from their distinctiveness.  Thanks to
    Thanos Apollo for bringing this matter to my attention.  It was done
    via a private channel and the information is shared with permission.

-   Amplified the intensity of the `#+begin_src` text when the user
    option opts for `(setq modus-themes-org-blocks 'gray-background)`.
    The text is now easier to discern.  That user option makes the
    inside of the block have a gray background and the begin/end lines
    to have a more intense gray, giving off a "blocky" impression.

-   Made the `compilation-warning` face also inherit the
    `modus-themes-bold` face.  This means that it responds to the value
    of the user option `modus-themes-bold-constructs`, the same way the
    other compilation-related mode line faces do.  Thanks to Manuel
    Giraud for informing me about the inconsistency in
    `compilation-warning`.  This was done via a private channel and the
    information is shared with permission.

-   Calibrated the hueness of the "nuanced" backgrounds in the
    `modus-operandi-tinted` and `modus-vivendi-tinted` themes.  These
    tweaks are necessary to retain thematic consistency.

-   Reset `mu4e-header-highlight-face` to its intended style.  I made a
    mistake before: I did not want the `highlight` face to be used in
    this case as it is too intense.  Sorry!

-   Toned down the highlight line of the `ctrlf` and `swiper` packages.
    I mistakenly used the `highlight` before, which is too intense for
    the purposes of an ancillary background colour.

-   Applied "nuanced" backgrounds to the tinted Org blocks.  This fixes
    an error of mine where I amplified the background colouration of Org
    blocks.  This concerns the case where the user option
    `modus-themes-org-blocks` has a `tinted-background` value.  Thanks
    to Mark Bestley for informing me about this in issue 60 on the
    GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/60#issuecomment-1374530488>.

-   Removed the hardcoding of the `italic` style in three faces, opting
    instead to make them subject to the user option `modus-themes-italic-constructs`.
    The faces are  `marginalia-documentation`, `markup-attribute-face`,
    and `org-agenda-calendar-sexp`.

-   Tweaked the Org agenda deadline and today schedule to use a bold
    weight only when the user option `modus-themes-bold-constructs` is
    set to a non-nil value.  Thanks to Marko Kocic for reporting an
    issue that brought this matter to my attention:
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C35588839.256749.1673272214728%40office.mailbox.org%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C874jszvk5g.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C87ilhfu101.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>

-   Enforced the main foreground colour in the faces `highlight` and
    `secondary-selection`.  This should have always been there to avoid
    awkward colour combinations.  I realised it was missing after
    corresponding with Edgar Vincent on a relevant topic:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C878ri95h1q.fsf%40posteo.net%3E#%3C87ilhc7usc.fsf@posteo.net%3E>.

-   Made the `eglot-mode-line` face conditionally bold, by subjecting it
    to the user option `modus-themes-bold-constructs`.

-   Ensure that the background of the `company` package's popup is the
    same as that of the `corfu` package.  This is a subtle neutral
    value.

-   Fixed the hue of the `org-habit` "ready" faces.  It should be green
    and I made a mistake here.  The `modus-operandi-deuteranopia` and
    `modus-vivendi-deuteranopia` themes do change the underlying hues
    though, as green is not suitable for them.

-   Simplified the `keycast` faces so that (i) they do not use a `:box`
    attribute that can look awkward in some cases and (ii) the name of
    the given command is not colourised to avoid exaggerations with the
    use of colour.

-   Made the `powerline-active1` face inherit from `mode-line` instead
    of `mode-line-active`.  The latter only exists in newer versions of
    Emacs and we do not want to make the themes break in older versions.
    Thanks to TitusMu for identifying this and reporting it in issue 64 on
    the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/64>.

-   Decoupled all `ediff` faces from their `diff-mode` counterparts.
    Ediff does not depend on `diff-mode`, so we want to make each set of
    faces stand on its own.  Thanks to Bernd Rellermeyer for pointing
    out this implicit dependency in issue 68 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/68>.


## Miscellaneous

-   Improved the clarity and robustness of the code that does the work
    of `modus-themes-list-colors`.

-   Refined the colour value of the `blue-warmer` named colour for all
    the light themes.  It is a tiny bit darker than before.

-   Introduced a `t` fallback value for the user option
    `modus-themes-completions`.  It makes it easier to apply the same
    styles for the selection line and matching characters.

-   Documented how to not extend the active region background.

-   Explained how to make tabs more or less colourful by using palette
    overrides.

-   Removed obsolete and redundant statements from the documentation the
    user option `modus-themes-completions`.  There was (i) an outdated
    reference to the `background` value, which is no longer supported,
    and (ii) a statement about the standard Completions' buffer that was
    not useful.  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for informing me about this:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm2tu1211qz.fsf%40me.com%3E>.

-   Rephrase the statement `"*Completions* buffer"` in the documentation
    in the interest of clarity.  Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the
    suggestion:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm2tu1211qz.fsf%40me.com%3E#%3Cm2eds43htz.fsf@me.com%3E>.

-   Updated the sample configuration of the themes with `use-package` in
    the interest of simplicity.  Thanks to Sergey Nichiporchik for the
    contribution.  Sergey's contribution is within the ~15 line limit
    and thus does not require copyright assignment to the Free Software
    Foundation.

    This was done in merge request 59 on the GitLab mirror:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/merge_requests/59>.

    The prepatory discussion took place in issue 310 on the same mirror:
    <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/-/issues/310>.

    Weeks later I further simplified the relevant samples for the sake
    of uniformity with the generic package setup.  Thanks to Zoltan
    Kiraly for informing me about the fact that the `:bind` keyword
    delays the load of the package until the given command is invoked:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/pull/67>.

    Streamlining the configuration makes it easier for me to propose one
    set of basic configurations without the need to know what a
    configuration macro is doing behind the scenes.

-   Fixed an example colour in the documentation.  Thanks to Russell Sim
    for spotting the error of me using `bg-blue` instead of
    `bg-blue-intense`:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cyger0wa9gsn.fsf%40simopolis.xyz%3E>.

-   Defined the missing `modus-themes-nuanced-{red,green,yellow,blue,magenta,cyan}` faces.
    Those are used internally to avoid repetition, though users can also
    rely on them for their personal configurations (same for all other
    Modus faces).

-   Improved the documentation on how to have a borderless mode line
    style by using the palette overrides.

-   Updated the manual's entry on the `pdf-tools` backdrop to make it
    use the new conventions that have been in place since version 4 of
    the themes.  Thanks to Utkarsh Singh for the patches:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/patches/37902>.

-   Add an explicit notice that the version of the themes that is built
    into Emacs must use the `require-theme` function instead of the
    familiar `require`.  Built-in themes are not considered "code", due
    to old conventions, and are not part of the `load-path` that
    `require` reads from.  This is not up to the theme to decide.
    Interested users must simply know about this important technicality.
    Thanks to Koen van Greevenbroek for reporting the problem that
    helped me identify this issue:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C31038fd76868fa3d07c9a429dfed8fd6ac374bb8.camel%40posteo.net%3E>.

-   Clarified the wording of the `modus-themes-with-colors` setup for
    custom faces.  It explains when this macro should be called.  Thanks
    to user bangedorrunt for the feedback in issue 59 on the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/59>.
