---
title: 'Emacs: pulsar version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my pulsar package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Pulsar is a small package that temporarily highlights the current line,
either on demand or automatically after invoking a function that is
present in a user-defined list.  [Watch the
demo](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-14-emacs-pulsar-demo/)

Further below are the release notes.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `pulsar`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/pulsar>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/pulsar>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/pulsar>
+ Backronym: Pulsar Unquestionably Luminates, Strictly Absent the Radiation

Below are the release notes.

* * *

-   The `next-buffer` and `previous-buffer` commands are added to the
    default value of the user option `pulsar-pulse-functions`.  They
    will now trigger a pulse effect after they are called (if
    `pulsar-mode` is enabled in the current buffer or
    `pulsar-global-mode` is in use).

-   The command `pulsar-recenter-middle` is now an alias for
    `pulsar-recenter-center`, instead of being the original name.  Users
    do not need to change anything on their end: this is just an
    internal arrangement to use a name that corresponds to the one of
    the underlying "recenter" mechanism.

-   The Lisp macro that was used to derive the Pulsar "recenter"
    commands has been removed.  The commands are `pulsar-recenter-top`
    and `pulsar-recenter-center`.  I originally thought the macro would
    be useful in more places, but I ended up relying on it only twice.
    
    Thanks to Ryan Kaskel for pointing out an intermediate typo/error I
    made while redefining the macro and before I decided to remove it
    altogether.  This was done as a comment on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar/commit/c5086de779a0226d72eca4d5cba8c7689bc278b2#r123397272>.

-   The Lisp macro `pulsar-pulse-with-face` is renamed to
    `pulsar-define-pulse-with-face`.  Its definition is updated to
    simplify how a Pulsar function is defined with a given face.
    Examples of such functions are `pulsar-pulse-line-red`,
    `pulsar-pulse-line-blue`.

-   Pulsar now retrieves the absolute beginning of the minibuffer
    prompt.  This means that a pulse in the minibuffer will cover the
    text of the prompt, as opposed to only affecting the input area.  As
    such, the pulse is visible even if the minibuffer is empty
    (e.g. what happens with the default completion setup when calling
    `M-x`).

-   The manual provides instructions on how to set up Pulsar to produce
    a pulse when the minibuffer is activated.  It cannot be done with
    the `pulsar-pulse-functions`, though the setup is not too involved.
    In short:

    ```elisp
    (add-hook 'minibuffer-setup-hook #'pulsar-pulse-line)

    ;; OR something like this, replacing "blue" with one among red,
    ;; green, yellow, magenta, cyan:
    (add-hook 'minibuffer-setup-hook #'pulsar-pulse-line-blue)
    ```
