---
title: 'Emacs: fontaine version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my fontaine package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Fontaine lets the user specify presets of font configurations and switch
between them on demand.  This makes it easy to optimise for different
contexts, such as a "reading" preset with large, spacious fonts, and an
"editing" preset with smaller, more compact fonts.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `fontaine`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/fontaine>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/fontaine-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/fontaine>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/fontaine>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/fontaine>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/fontaine>
+ Backronym: Fonts, Ornaments, and Neat Typography Are Irrelevant in Non-graphical Emacs

Below are the release notes.  Also make sure to check my [growing] list
of Emacs packages: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs>.

* * *

Fontaine has been in a stable state for several months now.  I am thus
increasing the major version number to reflect this fact.  Otherwise,
this is a small release with only one sizeable addition.


## Inherit the properties of another named preset

Preset font configuration can now optionally inherit (and thus extend)
the properties of another named preset.

When defining multiple presets, we may need to duplicate properties
and then make tweaks to individual values.  Suppose we want to have
two distinct presets for presentations: one is for coding related
demonstrations and the other for prose.  Both must have some common
styles, but must define distinct font families each of which is
suitable for the given task.  In this case, we do not want to fall
back to the generic `t` preset (per the default behaviour) and we also
do not wish to duplicate properties manually, potentially making
mistakes in the process.  Fontaine thus provides a method of
inheriting a named preset's properties by using the `:inherit`
property with a value that references the name of another preset
(technically, the `car` of that list).  Here is the idea:

```elisp
(setq fontaine-presets
      '((regular
         :default-height 100)
        (code-demo
         :default-family "Source Code Pro"
         :default-weight semilight
         :default-height 170
         :variable-pitch-family "Sans"
         :bold-weight extrabold)
        (prose-demo
         :inherit code-demo ; copy the `code-demo' properties
         :default-family "Sans"
         :variable-pitch-family "Serif"
         :default-height 220)
        (t
         :default-family "Monospace"
         ;; more generic fallback properties here...
         )))
```

In this scenario, the `regular` preset gets all its properties from
the `t` preset.  We omit them here in the interest of brevity (see the
default value of `fontaine-presets` and its documentation for the
details).  In turn, the `code-demo` specifies more properties and
falls back to `t` for any property not explicitly referenced therein.
Finally, the `prose-demo` copies everything in `code-demo`, overrides
every property it specifies, and falls back to `t` for every other
property.

In the interest of simplicity, Fontaine does not support recursive
inheritance.  If there is a compelling need for it, we can add it in
future versions.


## Bug fixes

-   Fixed a faulty setup for the `:height` attribute of the `bold` face.
    Using the commands `fontaine-set-preset` or `fontaine-set-face-font`
    with a prefix argument (`C-u` with default key bindings) does not
    produce an error anymore.  The prefix argument limits the operation
    to the current frame.

-   Updated the `Commentary` section of `fontaine.el` to use the
    FONTAINE backronym I have had on my website for a long time.
    Namely, I changed `FONTs Are Irrelevant in Non-graphical Emacs`,
    which was cheating on a few letters, to `Fonts, Ornaments, and Neat
      Typography Are Irrelevant in Non-graphical Emacs`.  What do you mean
    this is not a bug fix? 🙃
