---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.1.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

This release introduces several minor refinements to the project,
while adding support for more third-party packages or built-in face
groups.


## Tabs have their own semantic colour mappings

The Ef themes are designed to abstract away common patterns based on
the semantics of the elements involved.  For example, all strings in
programming modes use the `string` colour that each theme defines in
its palette.  This allows the themes to share the same code base yet
remain distinct from each other.

Colours used for `tab-bar-mode`, `tab-line-mode`, and related are now
part of this design.  The new semantic mappings are `bg-tab-bar`,
`bg-tab-current`, `bg-tab-other`.

[ A theme palette can have user-defined overrides (e.g. tweak the
  main background).  Consult the manual for the technicalities or
  contact me if there is any doubt. ]


## Added support for the `centaur-tabs` package

The aforementioned semantic colours are applied to the faces of the
`centaur-tabs`.  Using it with the themes now works as expected,
instead of defaulting to its own dark background colour (a default
that doesn't work with most themes, anyway).

Thanks to Amo DelBello for bringing this matter to my attention in
issue 21 on the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/21>.


## Covered the `nerd-icons`, `nerd-icons-dired`, `nerd-icons-ibuffer` packages

These are a new family of packages that are gaining traction in the
Emacs milieu (for instance, the `doom-modeline` now uses the Nerd
icons, which must be installed with `M-x nerd-icons-install-fonts`).

Their colours are now consistent with all the Ef themes.


## Tweaked the colouration of the `all-the-icons` glyphs

I refined some of the colours in use to introduce greater variety and
amplify certain values while avoiding exaggerations.  In short, they
should look nice and pretty.


## The `whitespace-mode` indicators are much more subtle

The previous style involved the use of a dim grey background.  While
this is good to spot invisible characters quickly, it is bad for users
who want to run `whitespace-mode` at all times (e.g. for Python which
is space-sensitive).

We thus remove the backgrounds by default but provide the option to
reinstate them via palette overrides (as documented at length in the
manual).  To this end, we have new semantic colour mappings for
ordinary negative space and its invisible characters:

-   `bg-space`
-   `fg-space`
-   `bg-space-err`


## Ediff faces no longer have an implicit dependency on diff-mode

I made a mistake where the Ediff faces would inherit the styles of
their `diff-mode` counterparts.  This usually works, such as when
`ediff` is invoked from `magit`, though it will not do the right thing
if the user invokes some Ediff command directly without first loading
`diff-mode`.

This no longer happens.  Ediff always works.  Stylistically,
everything looks the same.


## The `git-gutter` and `git-gutter-fr` packages are supported

These now use the appropriate colours defined by the Ef themes.  This
is especially important for themese that do not use the generic
red-green colour coding scheme.


## image-dired marked items are easier to spot

With `image-dired` the user can apply selection or deletion marks to
image thumbnails.  Those marks are colour-coded the same way they are
in Dired (the exact hues depend on the theme to account for
accessibility, e.g. for deuteranopia or tritanopia).  Sometimes the
colour of the mark is obscured by the same colour found in the
thumbnail.  To make the mark stand out, a border is drawn around it,
making the selection unambiguous.


## Holidays and diary entries are more distinct and have no background

The holidays and diary entries that are found in the `M-x calendar` or
`M-x diary` buffers no longer use a subtle background colour.  The old
design was not consistent with similar patterns established by the
themes, such as how a date/timestamp should be represented.

Furthermore, the given constructs are assigned to contrasting hues to
stand apart from each other and also be easy spot in their context
(especially holidays in the Calendar view).


## The `mood-line` is covered by the themes

This is a package that refashions the Emacs mode line.  It is
conceptually similar to the `doom-modeline`.


## Miscellaneous

-   Added links in the Custom User Interface to the `ef-themes` web
    pages for the manual and sample pictures, respectively.  Those links
    are visible when perusing the various `M-x customize` buffers where
    entries related to the Ef themes are present.

-   Made `ef-themes--load-theme` return the `THEME` argument it operates
    on.  The intent is to allow other functions that call this one to
    capture the return value for their purposes.

-   Extended support for the built-in ERT faces, which are used in
    regression tests of Emacs Lisp code.
