---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.3.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Try the aquatic "Maris" variants

The `ef-maris-dark` and `ef-maris-light` are a pair of themes with a
grey-blue background, combined with blue, cyan, and green accents.
Much like the "Elea" variants that were published in version 1.2.0 of
the `ef-themes`, the "Maris" variants are optimal for those times
where environmental lighting is neither too bright nor too dim.

The blog post announcing and demonstrating the new themes:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-07-22-ef-maris-dark-light/>.

Screen shots for the entire collection here:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>.

There now are 26 themes in the `ef-themes` package, covering a broad
range of preferences and needs.  They all are highly legible and
customisable (consult their manual).


## Shortdoc has consistent typography

The default built-in `shortdoc` face inherit the `variable-pitch`
face, which renders the text in the buffer proportionately spaced.  To
me, this feels out of place.  If the user wants Help and related
ancillary material to be typeset thus, they can enable
`variable-pitch-mode` (e.g. via a hook).

Thanks to Bruno Boal for pointing out that the Ef themes did not cover
Shortdoc.  The message was conveyed via a private channel and the
information is shared with permission.


## Key bindings in minibuffer prompts stand out

Steve Molinor informed me about a case where a key binding was shown
as part of the minibuffer prompt.  For some Ef themes, the result was
suboptimal due to the proximity of the colours involved.  I made all
the requisite tweaks, such that key bindings in prompts will stand out
(always in accordance with the principle of avoiding exaggerations).
Affected themes are:

-   `ef-bio-theme`
-   `ef-deuteranopia-dark-theme`
-   `ef-duo-light-theme`
-   `ef-elea-dark-theme`
-   `ef-elea-light-theme`
-   `ef-frost-theme`
-   `ef-night-theme`

This was done in issue 24 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/24>.


## The `ace-window` package is supported

The `ace-window` package now uses colours that are aligned with the
active Ef theme.  This is mostly a stylistic consideration, except for
the deuteranopia- and tritanopia- optimised themes, where the hue
matters greatly.


## The Ef commands with completion use a "completion table"

[ This is for advanced users or developers. ]

Commands such as `ef-themes-select` and `ef-themes-preview-colors` use
the minibuffer to pick a theme among the collection.  In the past, the
set of candidates did not have any metadata associated with it, so
Emacs could not tell what it was completing against.

The collection is now annotated with the completion category `theme`.
Packages that can use this data include `consult`, `embark`, and
`marginalia`, while the built-in `completion-category-overrides` may
be involved.  For example, one may define a custom annotation function
for Marginalia, such that the alignment of the doc strings is at
column 40 instead of the generic default (I do not add any alignment
at the theme level to keep it agnostic of the completion front-end).


## General refinements

-   The `ef-elea-light` theme's palette entry of `bg-changed-refine` is
    marginally toned down.  This makes it consistent with its context
    (e.g. in Ediff buffers).

-   The `ef-deuteranopia-light` theme's palette entry of `magenta-faint`
    is desaturated to fit better in its context.  The `M-x calendar` as
    well as Org agenda buffers that show weekends will now look more
    consistent.

-   The `ef-bio` theme's semantic colour mapping of `link-alt` is
    further differentiated from `link`.  The previous value could be
    conflated with that of `link` in Info buffers.
