---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Enjoy the new "Elea" variants

The `ef-elea-light` and `ef-elea-dark` take inspiration from olives
and olive trees.  Their background is noticeably more subdued than
that of other Ef themes, making Elea optimal for times where
environmental light is neither too high nor too low.

Blog post that announced the new themes and presented their screen
shots: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-06-18-ef-elea-dark-light/>.

Those who like primarily green-tinted themes can also try `ef-spring`
(light) and `ef-bio` (dark).

The `ef-themes` collection now consists of 24 items, covering a broad
range of preferences and legibility needs.  Each theme is tested
extensively for stylistic consistency, as well as overall
effectiveness across the full spectrum of interfaces encountered in
Emacs.


## Support for the `avy` package

The `avy` package is now fully supported by the themes.  This was not
a trivial task, due to Avy's unique requirement for sufficiently high
contrast between adjacent coloured background *in addition* to the
goal of the themes for comfortably high contrast between each given
combination of foreground and background.  To make the task even more
demanding, we have to account for colour deficiency, as in the case of
the tritanopia-optimised themes: `ef-tritanopia-light`,
`ef-tritanopia-dark` (tritanopia is blue-yellow colour deficiency).


## Support for other Avy-like elements

The `corfu` and `vertico` packages provide Avy-like commands to select
a candidate in their respective completion interface.  Those are now
fully supported, benefitting from the aforementioned work.


## Explicit support for `which-key`

The popular `which-key` package was already implicitly supported by
the themes.  Its faces inherit from standard font-lock faces.  I
decided to add explicit support in order to override its overall
style, as its default is too busy, although it technically works.
This hints at the unseen, yet non-trivial, effort themes require to
avoid exaggerations (in short: when everything is emphasised, nothing
stands out; when something indicates a familiar element of the
interface, it must have an equally familiar styling to minimise
friction/uncertainty).


## Support for `csv-mode`

The `csv-mode` defines the face of a separator character for the
tabular entries.  Its colour should now be easier to spot.


## Revised the Git summary line

The colour of the Git commit summary line, both for Magit and VC, is
now drawn from each theme's semantic `info` colour, whereas before it
was another accent colour.  The reason for this change is to make the
summary line always contrast nicely with the overlong summary warning
(the warning is visible when the length of the summary exceeds the
specified limit (check each package's configurations)).


## Miscellaneous

-   Completion annotations are not shown for yet-to-be-loaded Ef themes.
    This avoids errors in `modus-themes-select` and related commands
    that use minibuffer completion.  Thanks to Christopher League for
    the patch.  The change is small and falls within the limits of what
    is allowed without assigning copyright to the Free Software
    Foundation.  This case was discussed in issue 22 on the GitHub
    mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/22>.

-   The documentation of `ef-themes-headings` uses simpler list
    constructs.  There is no user-facing change.  Thanks to Eshel Yaron
    for the patch, which is within the boundaries of what is possible
    with copyright assignment to the Free Software Foundation:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/patches/42030>.

-   The manual of the themes, as well as the `contrast-ratios.org` file
    that is part of the project's Git repository, are reviewed to
    reflect the current state of the `ef-themes`.
