---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

This is the first major release of the `ef-themes`.  The project is in
a stable state.  I continue to make refinements to it, especially for
the sort of details that are hard to spot.


## Try the two new themes

The `ef-kassio` and `ef-symbiosis` provide yet more stylistic
variation to an already wide collection:

-   `ef-kassio` is a light theme that harmoniously combines blue and red
    hues in an overall design that feels earthly and measured.  Its name
    is a cryptic reference to a place in Greece.

-   `ef-symbiosis` is a dark theme that balances contrasting cool and
    warm hues.  Deep and lighter browns blend with vivid greens and
    neutral blues.  The name of the theme is a reference to the
    coexistence of hues that could belong to two separate themes, yet
    feel natural in tandem.

Picture of all the themes: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>.


## Commands to switch between only dark or light themes

The `ef-themes-select-dark` and `ef-themes-select-light` provide
minibuffer completion that limits the candidates to the respective
subset.  This makes it easier for users to discover another theme they
may like.


## Helpful completion annotations

All Ef commands that use minibuffer completion now produce annotations
that describe in a few words what each theme is about.  For example,
`ef-deuteranopia-dark` is presented as a "Legible dark theme,
optimized for red-green color deficiency".


## Palette overrides

All variables that allow the user to override named colours and
semantic colour mappings are now declared as user options.
Concretely, these can now be discovered from the Custom interface.

Palette overrides are not new to this version, though they are
henceforth considered stable for widespread use.  Consult the manual
for how to make use of them and how to preview the entries of any
given theme palette.

To ensure consistency, some symbols in the palette have been renamed.
For example, graph colours follow the pattern `bg-graph-red-0` instead
of `red-graph-0-bg`.  Same for intensely coloured backgrounds, which
are now named like `bg-red-intense` rather than `bg-red`.


## Improved graph colours

All themes have a refined palette subset for graph-related purposes.
These are encountered, for example, in the `org-habit` consistency
graph.  The differences are subtle, yet important in context to
improve the usability of the given interfaces.


## Improved graph colours for deuteranopia, tritanopia

I also recalibrated the graph-related colours for the deuteranopia-
and tritanopia- optimized themes.  This is related to the above, but I
am writing it separately as it has its own requirements.

The default design of `org-habit` expects a colour coding of red,
yellow, green, blue.  This cannot work for users with either red-green
or blue-yellow colour deficiency.  The relevant Ef themes have long
accounted for this requirement, though they now are even better at it.


## Support for new faces and changes to existing ones

-   Newly supported packages are: `jinx`, `rst-mode`, `vundo`, `vterm`.
    Consult the manual for the full list of supported packages.  Some
    packages are implicitly covered, because they have reasonable
    defaults, such as my `sxhkdrc-mode`.

-   The built-in `menu`, `scroll-bar`, and `tool-bar` faces are now
    covered.  These only come into effect in certain scenaria, such as
    an Emacs build done with the Lucid toolkit or a text session that
    involves usage of the menu bar.

-   The built-in `flymake` linter has several new faces in Emacs 29 and
    Emacs 30, which are now fully supported by the themes and styled in
    the interest of harmony (`flymake` is available from GNU ELPA for
    those who want to benefit from the latest features in older versions
    of Emacs).

-   The built-in `proced` has several new faces.  All are supported,
    adding optional extra colour to those buffers without overdoing it.

-   Org mode has a new `org-agenda-calendar-daterange` face.  It is
    covered and there also are semantic colour mappings for date ranges.

-   Clickable buttons, such as in Custom buffers, are now shown with a
    three-dimensional effect.  The flat style creates ambiguity between
    the button and the text fields.  This happens, for example, with
    `M-x customize-variable` for `org-capture-templates` which has lots
    of button and text field combinations.  The added sense of depth
    helps with the usability of these buttons because it makes them
    unambiguous.

-   All relevant faces correspond to the semantic colour mappings for
    `prose-code` and `prose-verbatim` (useful for palette overrides).
