---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 2.0.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

This is the second major version of Denote, close to one year after
its initial release.  The video demo I did back then remains relevant,
even though lots of details have changed.


## Notes have a new optional SIGNATURE field

It is now possible to create notes that include a `SIGNATURE` field in
their file name.  Either use the convenience command `denote-signature`
or configure the user option `denote-prompts` to affect what the `denote`
command should prompt for.

Signatures are arbitrary strings of characters that enable the user to
further qualify their documents.  One possible workflow is to write
relational notes, such that `1a1` is the first extension of another
note with a `1a` signature.

The design of the `SIGNATURE` field is consistent with the Denote
file-naming scheme.  The field separator is the double equals sign
(`==`), while words that comprise the signature are joined together by
a single equals sign.  As such, the user can prefix a search with an
equals sign to match words in the `SIGNATURE`, just as they would use
dashes for the `TITLE` and underscores for the `KEYWORDS`.

[ Read the manual for the technicalities of the Denote file-naming
  scheme.  This is not limited to "notes": any file can be named
  accordingly (I do it with my videos, for example). ]

Signatures are not included in a file's front matter.  This is a
strategic decision to preserve backward compatibility, while not
introducing a feature that has not enjoyed widespread usage.  I want
to make signatures behave the same as the rest of the file name
fields, though I am interested to learn how users employ them in their
workflow.

The signature extension was discussed at length on the GitHub mirror
in issue 115: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/115>.
Thanks to Stefan Thesing, Mirko Hernandez, Noboru Ota (nobiot),
Xiaoxing Hu, nbehrnd, Elias Storms, and 101scholar for helping me
reason about this feature, understand its scope, and prototype its
implementation.

Also thanks to Alfredo Borrás and Jeremy Friesen for discussing with
me the field delimiter of signatures on the mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C2A597B4E-5F18-4D97-9457-B3C859DAA020%40zoho.eu%3E>.
Thanks to Kai von Fintel for doing the same on the GitHub mirror in
issue 147: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/147>.

Read the original announcement:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-03-20-emacs-denote-signature-feature/>.

As part of the development, I fixed a case where
`denote-rename-file-using-front-matter` would fail if it could not
find a signature

The idea is that we want the command to behave the way it always did
when the file has no signature and to preserve the signature when it
is present.

Thanks to relict for reporting the issue on the mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87zg86lru9.fsf%40kotlak.com%3E>.


## The rename commands avoid creating duplicate identifiers

Denote provides commands to rename an existing file to one that
follows the Denote file-naming scheme (videos, PDFs, other text
documents, &#x2026;).  Check, for example, the `denote-rename-file` and
`denote-dired-rename-marked-files`.  The idea is to make everything
easier to search.

In prior versions, these commands could produce duplicate identifiers
if the modification date of the underlying files was the same.  Such a
scenario occurs when the files are modified programmatically, as with
the `touch` command or the various `git` operations.

Denote will now take care to increment the identifier until it becomes
unique within the current scope.

Thanks to Felipe Balbi for reporting this bug in issue 105 on the
GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/105>.

Thanks to Vedang Manerikar and Jean-Charles Bagneris for commenting on
this feature on the mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87v8emeus0.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>.

Thanks to Ashton Wiersdorf for noticing a mistake I made that caused a
regression in `denote-rename-file`:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm2lefbbzl1.fsf%40wiersdorfmail.net%3E>.


### Optional arguments affect `denote-dired-rename-marked-files`

The `denote-dired-rename-marked-files` now accepts two optional
arguments.  When called interactively, these are interpreted as a
single or double universal prefix argument (`C-u` by default, though
do `M-x where-is` and search for `universal-argument`).

The first argument, named `SKIP-FRONT-MATTER-PROMPT`, skips the "yes
or no" prompt requested at the outset of the operation, passing to it
an affirmative response.  Thanks to Jay Rajput for asking the question
that inspired me to implement this.  It was done in issue 155 on the
GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/155>.

The second argument, named `NO-UNIQUE-ID-CHECK`, will not perform any
checks for potential duplicate identifiers.  The default is to check
for duplicates and increment them such that they become unique.  The
reason this optional argument exists is for those who want to speed up
the process, perhaps because they know ahead of time all identifiers
will be unique or do not care about them.

Thanks to Bruno Boal for refining how the prefix argument is
processed.  The patch was sent via a private channel.  The change is
small and thus does not require copyright assignment to the Free
Software Foundation.


## Menu entries help users discover Denote

Users of `menu-bar-mode` and/or `context-menu-mode` will now find a
submenu with points of entry to Denote.  Refer to the publication I
made on my website, as it includes a picture:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-03-31-emacs-denote-menu/>.  I
will save the thousand words for the following sections. 🙃

There is a known issue where the `menu-bar-mode` entry is positioned
before the `File` submenu.  Apparently, there exists an inelegant way
to place the menu elsewhere, but I am not willing to maintain hacks
for missing functionality.  If someone knows a clear way to put the
submenu elsewhere, please contact me: I want it to be after `Tools`.

Thanks to Kai von Fintel and Noboru Ota (nobiot) for discussing the
placement of the submenu:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C2B60992C-0FC9-42CC-B669-69A544450FEF%40mit.edu%3E>.


## "Link" commands have simpler names

Originally, Denote was organised as a collection of several files,
each of which had its own prefix like `denote-dired.el`, and
`denote-link.el`.  This arrangement was deemed surplus to requirements
and all core code was consolidated in `denote.el`.  An artefact of
that design was the presence of symbols that retained their admittedly
awkward names, like the command `denote-link-backlinks` or
`denote-link-add-missing-links`.

All such commands are deprecated.  They are replaced with more
discoverable names.  The deprecation is done in such a way that the
old names are aliases for the new ones, but the user is warned not to
rely on them.

The new names in detail:

| Old name 🤨                         | New name 🤩                                                   |
|-------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------|
| `denote-link-add-links`             | `denote-add-links`                                            |
| `denote-link-add-missing-links`     | `denote-add-missing-links`                                    |
| `denote-link-backlinks`             | `denote-backlinks`                                            |
| `denote-link-find-file`             | `denote-find-link`                                            |
| `denote-link-insert-link`           | `denote-insert-link` (alias for `denote-link`)                |
| `denote-link-show-backlinks-buffer` | `denote-show-backlinks-buffer` (alias for `denote-backlinks`) |

## Denote buffers can have shorter names

The Denote file-naming scheme is designed to be a low-tech way of
embedding information in files, making them easier to find.  A
downside is that the names are longer than `blah.txt` and so the
default Emacs behaviour is to derive a buffer name from the file name.

The new optional `denote-rename-buffer.el` provides a minor mode to
automatically rename the buffer of an existing file, such that it
reflects the file's `TITLE` field.  Users must enable
`denote-rename-buffer-mode`.

The renaming procedure is controlled by the user option
`denote-rename-buffer-function`.  By default, it provides the means to
rename using (i) the title, (ii) the identifier, or (iii) a custom
function that returns a string.  Experienced users can refer to
`denote-rename-buffer-with-title` to draw inspiration on the design of
such a function.

Thanks to Morgan Davidson for asking a question that inspired me to
implement this feature.  The discussion took place in issue 151 on the
GitHub mirror <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/151>.


## Silos work as directory trees

Denote provides a feature to isolate files in to their own silos, each
of which functions as its own `denote-directory` variable.  The
technicalities are explained in the manual.  Silos have proven to be a
valuable aspect of file management and I have thus expanded their
scope to work as fully fledged directory trees.  This means that we no
longer assume a silo to be a flat directory listing, but instead
recognise any subdirectories inside of it.

Thanks to relict007, Hilde Rhyne, Mirko Hernández, Noboru Ota
(nobiot), Alan Schmitt, hapst3r, and Hilde Rhyne for their
participation in the relevant discussions:

-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87fsb72nge.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C80CBB671-D812-4EA8-8C80-85F9F4144051%40disroot.org%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87pma6t59i.fsf%40kotlak.com%3E>
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/129> (GitHub mirror)
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3CB124A5AF-9968-4F7E-9F4B-2BC763E0BFCF@disroot.org%3E#%3Cm0sff0nnhb.fsf@disroot.org%3E>.


## Keywords do not accept multiple words by default

The idea is to have short keywords and then use more than one, if
necessary.  We do not want to encourage the habit of long keywords
that become overly specific, while we want to avoid the use of
dashes as delimited in the file name's `KEYWORDS` field.

Technically, this changes the default value of the user option
`denote-allow-multi-word-keywords`.  Users who preferred the old
behaviour can simply toggle it on.


## Pass arguments to Org capture

Denote is not an extension of Org mode, though it can integrate with
`org-capture`.  I now make it possible to design a capture template
that uses specific prompts.  Consult the section in the manual titled
"Create note with specific prompts using Org capture".

Thanks to Aditya Yadav for asking about this in issue 132 on the
GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/132>.


## Change an existing note's file type

The command `denote-change-file-type` changes the file type of an
existing note.  The available options are those among
`denote-file-type`.  Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the
contribution, which was done in pull request 137 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/137>.


## Denote dynamic blocks can now parse `rx` notation

Denote can leverage the Org feature of "dynamic blocks" to produce
lists of links/backlinks.  This is especially useful for metanotes
(read the Denote manual&#x2014;I document everything for a reason).

Before, regular expressions were implemented only as strings while now
they can also be written using the `rx` notation.  Thanks to Mirko
Hernandez for proposing this feature and discussing it with me in
issue 122 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/122>.

Thanks to Elias Storms, the author of `denote-org-dblock.el`, for
iterating on this functionality.  This was done in pull request 130 on
the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/130>.


## Made links to non-note files works as intended

The function `denote-get-path-by-id` is refactored to accept any file
with an identifier.  This always was its intended purpose.  The user
was always able to create `denote:` Org link types to, for example,
`jpg` files but `denote-get-path-by-id` was refusing to resolve the
otherwise valid path.  Thanks to user relict007 for reporting the
problem and discussing it with me in issue 135 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/135>.

The change was not trivial.  It was followed up by a patch from Noboru
Ota (nobiot) which elaborated on the conditionality.  Quoting from
commit `9ce9a24`:

> fix(denote-get-path-by-id): #135
>
> Reference: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/135>
>
> This patch change function 'denote-get-path-by-id' to allow for the following:
>
> -   A single ID points to multiple files with different extensions
> -   Denote needs to find a single file out of the multiple files
> -   This is not necessarily a user error (export an Org file to an HTML)
> -   Denote should let user decide their "primary" file extension
>
> The case the patch is intended to fix goes something like this:
>
> -   You have 20230216\_<sub>mynotes</sub>&#x2013;tag.org.
> -   You export it to 20230216\_<sub>mynotes</sub>&#x2013;tag.html.
> -   Both files are in denote-directory
> -   This means you have two files with the same ID with different
>     extensions denote-link-find-file, denote-link-find-backlink, and xref
>     integration might find the html file INSTEAD OF the .org file
>
> This is because html is earlier in the alphabetical order than
> org. Because the function uses seq-find, it will find the .html file
> first and returns it.


## The `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter` works with empty keywords

Keywords are an optional field in the Denote file-naming scheme.
However, an earlier version of the command mentioned in this heading
was considering them mandatory and would refuse to proceed if the
keywords were nil.  Thanks to Eduardo Grajeda for fixing this:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/39896>.

The change is within the ~15 line limit and does not require copyright
assignment to the Free Software Foundation.


## The `denote-title-prompt` has its own history

Denote implements minibuffer histories for all its relevant functions.
This makes it easier for users to retrieve their previous inputs and
to not get irrelevant ones.

Before, the `denote-title-prompt` was not using its own history but
was instead relying on another one that was intended only for file
paths, thus mixing unrelated inputs.

Thanks to Jonathan Sahar for bringing this matter to my attention.
This was done in issue 144 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/144>.


## For developers or advanced users


### Made it possible to add predicates for recursive file listing

The helper function `denote--directory-all-files-recursively` accepts
predicates to help speed up its work.

Thanks to Wade Mealing for reporting the issue about the performance
of the built-in function `directory-files-recursively` in large,
nested directories.  And thanks to Graham Marlow for the patch, which
was prepared as part of an extended discussion with me:

-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/40370>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C20230414000311.1981-1-graham%40mgmarlow.com%3E#%3C76ed9fe2-d597-f7b9-5e59-717aeb77c3c3@mgmarlow.com%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/40384>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87edonhvy0.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C76ed9fe2-d597-f7b9-5e59-717aeb77c3c3%40mgmarlow.com%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87zg75q4er.fsf%40protesilaos.com%3E>
-   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3CCAO4UgPQtxhhqW0tB7eZnVh4nF9vLvnVGx+5oB_78_dg32URSLA%40mail.gmail.com%3E>


### New public symbols

The following are now public symbols that we commit to support and
document henceforth:

-   **Function `denote-file-type-extensions`:** Return all file type
    extensions in `denote-file-types`.

-   **Variable `denote-encryption-file-extensions`:** List of strings
    specifying file extensions for encryption.

-   **Function `denote-file-type-extensions-with-encryption`:** Derive
    `denote-file-type-extensions` plus `denote-encryption-file-extensions`.

-   **Function `denote-link-return-links`:** Return list of links in
    current or optional `FILE`.  Also see `denote-link-return-backlinks`.

-   **Function `denote-link-return-backlinks`:** Return list of links in
    current or optional `FILE`.  Also see `denote-link-return-links`.

-   **Function `denote-rewrite-front-matter`:** Rewrite front matter of
    note after `denote-rename-file` (or related) The `FILE`, `TITLE`,
    `KEYWORDS`, and `FILE-TYPE` arguments are given by the renaming
    command and are used to construct new front matter values if
    appropriate.

-   **Function `denote-rewrite-keywords`:** Rewrite `KEYWORDS` in `FILE`
    outright according to `FILE-TYPE`.  Do the same as
    `denote-rewrite-front-matter` for keywords, but do not ask for
    confirmation.  This is for use in `denote-keywords-add`,
    `denote-keywords-remove`, `denote-dired-rename-marked-files`, or
    related.

I am publicising the `denote-link-return-links` and its counterpart in
response to the mailing list thread started by relict007:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87a5ygk6yi.fsf@kotlak.com%3E>.
relict007 is the developer of the `denote-cache` package (in
progress): <https://git.sr.ht/~relict007/denote-cache>.

Similarly, the `denote-rewrite-keywords` is made public upon the
request of Alan Schmitt:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3Cm2ttzgn2wu.fsf%40m4x.org%3E>.


## Miscellaneous

-   Revised `denote-link-return-{links,backlinks}` to not produce a
    `user-error`.  The errors are reserved for the interactive
    functions. The others are for developers. Thanks to Elias Storms for
    bringing this matter to my attention:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/commit/694c1517be73949edbc3993c105c764da8e2571f#commitcomment-112677876>.

-   Refrained from trying to find forward links in non-text-files.  If a
    file extension is not in `denote-file-types`, we have no way of
    parsing or finding outgoing links in it. This change checks for the
    file extension early on in 'when-let\*' block and avoids opening the
    file which is a relatively costly operation (and would fail finding
    links anyway).  Thanks to relict007 for the patch.  This was done on
    the mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87r0riffdx.fsf%40kotlak.com%3E>
    The change is small and thus does not require copyright assignment
    to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Explained how to troubleshoot Denote.  Refer to the section in the
    manual titled "Troubleshoot Denote in a pristine environment."
    While this is about Denote, the skills apply to all Emacs packages.

-   Ensured backlinks get correct `denote-directory` path.  The
    backlinks buffer will now get the correct path when it is generated
    inside a silo.  This is related to issue 129 reported by hapst3r on
    the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/129>.
    The change is necessary because `.dir-locals.el` do not work for
    buffers, so we must get the value from the file that calls
    `denote-link-backlinks`.

-   Added missing underscore from examples in exporting section.  Thanks
    to Peter Prevos for bringing this matter to my attention:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C87fs8b85tq.fsf%40prevos.net%3E#%3C87lehiuxfo.fsf@protesilaos.com%3E>.

-   Made the command `denote-open-or-create` work with an empty
    `denote-directory`.  The `denote-file-prompt` would throw an error
    before.  The correct behaviour is to proceed to the "Create" phase
    if the `denote-directory` is empty.  Thanks to user drcxd for
    reporting the bug in issue 131 on the GitHub mirror and for testing
    my sample code: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/131>.

-   Documented how to use tree-based file prompt on demand.  This is my
    solution to a request made by Mirko Hernandez on the possible use of
    the old Denote file prompt.  It is better not to introduce a user
    option for this case, nor to keep multiple variants of the
    `denote-file-prompt` in denote.el, as we want to keep things simple.
    Mirko's feedback was provided in issue 121 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/121>.

-   Added the variable `denote-user-enforced-denote-directory`.  This is
    intended for users who write custom code to extend Denote.  The
    value of this variable should be `let` bound around calls to the
    function `denote-directory`, thus overriding its return value.  This
    was discussed on the mailing list and then introduced by Vedang
    Manerikar in commit `977c757`, with further changes by me in
    `20ddc97`: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/41776>.
    Vedang has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Fixed `my-denote-org-extract-subtree` section of the documentation.
    This is part of some sample code that is not part of `denote.el`,
    but we provide as a convenience/inspiration for interested parties.

    The provided function did not work correctly.

    1.  Tags are extracted before deleting the region from the source file.
    2.  The function `org-end-of-subtree` is called to calculate the
        point we should delete up to.  The previously used function
        `org-entry-end-position` ends at the first sub-heading under the
        tree, which is not what we want.  Instead, we want to cut the
        whole subtree.
    3.  The date information available in the subtree is retained.  We
        look for three common places for this information: the `CREATED`
        or `DATE` properties in the `PROPERTIES` drawer, and the `CLOSED`
        cookie at the element level itself.

    Thanks to Vedang Manerikar for the contribution:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3CCABzEscbPx24LCUCc7JsMmQtVGwhou5fUH_5h+%3Dt%3Dqi4396NqNQ%40mail.gmail.com%3E>

-   Removed the dependency on the built-in `xdg` library and updated the
    default value of the user option `denote-directory`.  The reason is
    that XDG is a Linux standard that does not work on other operating
    systems, according to private feedback I received.

-   Fixed a regression for `M-p` (`previous-history-element`) in "do or
    create" commands.  Read the doc string of the commands
    `denote-open-or-create` or `denote-link-or-create` for how this is
    supposed to work.  In short:

    -   Invoke the "do or create" command.
    -   Type something that does not match a file.
    -   In the following title prompt, hit `M-p` to bring back the last input.

    I realised there was a regression when I read issue 152 on the
    GitHub mirror, which was created by user "ustcpxy":
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/152>.  The issue is
    about skipping the file title prompt.

-   Simplified the internal `denote--buffer-file-names`.  Thanks to Adam
    Růžička for noting that my change was not compatible with older
    Emacs versions, and for preparing the change.  This was discussed in
    pull request 158 on the GitHub mirror, with my suggestion to not use
    `seq-filter` as it affected the return value:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/158>. The change is
    below the 15 line limit, meaning that Adam does have to assign
    copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Documented custom code in the manual on how to interactively select
    a silo.  I am providing this in response to a request from GitHub
    user rbenit68.  The discussion took place in issue 127 on the GitHub
    mirror, with the participation of Mirko Hernandez:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/127>. The custom code
    I provide is the expanded version of an idea put forth by Mirko, to
    whom I am thankful.

-   Fixed an outdated reference in the `denote-file-types` doc string.
    Thanks to user doolio for spotting the error and reporting it in
    issue 139 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/139>.

-   Cited in the manual's section "Publications about Denote" an article
    by Mohamed Suliman titled *Managing a bibliography of BiBTeX entries
    with Denote* (2022-12-20):
    <https://www.scss.tcd.ie/~sulimanm/posts/denote-bibliography.html>.
    If you have published something related to Denote, please let me
    know and I will add to the list.

-   Cited the essay by Summer Emacs titled *An explanation of how I use
    Emacs* (2023-05-04):
    <https://github.com/summeremacs/howiuseemacs/blob/main/full-explanation-of-how-i-use-emacs.org>

-   Cited the video series by Stefan Thesing titled /Denote as a
    Zettelkasten/: <https://www.thesing-online.de/blog/denote-as-a-zettelkasten/>.

-   Added link to Karl Voit's work in the manual's section "Alternative
    implementations and further reading."  Thanks to Norwid Behrnd for
    the contribution in pull request 123 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/123>.

-   Fixed the broken link to jao's blog.  Thanks to Tomasz Hołubowicz
    for the contribution, which was done in pull request 145 on the
    GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/145>.

-   Authored lots of other ancillary changes/features to the code base
    or the manual (yes, this change log is how I "cut the long story
    short").
