---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 0.11.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Extremely Fatigued by Themes Having Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## New options to override the colour palette

It is now possible to tweak the colour values of each theme's palette
and to change how named colours are mapped to semantic constructs.
Concretely, each theme's palette consists of two subsets: (i) named
colours that associate an arbitrary symbol, like `blue-warmer` to a
colour value such as `#5250ef`, and (ii) semantic colour mappings that
assign a named colour to constructs like `date-weekend`.

[ For a video demo of the same idea that I implemented in the
  `modus-themes`, check *mutatis mutandis*:
  <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-12-17-modus-themes-v4-demo/>. ]

The feature is not as fully fledged as in my `modus-themes` because
the latter have a broader scope than the `ef-themes`.  Still, it is
comprehensive and will likely cover the needs of users who want to
tinker with colours.


## The "preview palette" commands have new aliases

The command `ef-themes-preview-colors` can now also be called with
`ef-themes-list-colors`.  Same for `ef-themes-preview-colors-current`
which is also known as `ef-themes-list-colors-current`.

These new names make it easier to "preview" or "list" the given
palette entries.


## Palette preview commands can show semantic colour mappings

When called with a prefix argument (`C-u` with default key bindings),
the commands `ef-themes-preview-colors`, `ef-themes-preview-colors-current`
will produce a buffer with the mappings specified in the given palette
and in user-defined overrides.  Whereas their normal behaviour without
the prefix argument is to list all the named colours.

In this context, "named colours" are associations between a symbol and
a colour value like `(blue-warmer "#5250ef")`, whereas "semantic
colour mappings" describe associations between an abstract construct
of the interface and a named colour, such as `(variable blue-warmer)`.


## Automatically disable other themes when loading an Ef theme

The user option `ef-themes-disable-other-themes` makes the commands
that load an Ef theme run `disable-theme` on anything that is not part
of the collection.  These commands are `ef-themes-select`,
`ef-themes-toggle`, `ef-themes-load-random`.

The user option is enabled by default.  The reason is that Emacs will
blithely blend multiple themes that a user loads, leading to a design
that ranges from mildly annoying to outright unusable.  It is a bad
default behaviour that hinders accessibility.

Expert users who know what they are doing when blending themes can
simply disable this user option (or not use the Ef commands for
loading a theme).


## Stylistic changes


### Refined deuteranopia warning colours

[ "Deuteranopia" is the technical term for red-green colour deficiency. ]

This concerns the themes `ef-deuteranopia-dark` and
`ef-deuteranopia-light`.  The slightly adjusted colours help further
differentiate certain constructs in various contexts, such as the Org
agenda buffer where `SCHEDULED` and `DEADLINE` items need to be told
apart.


### Implemented appropriate colour-coded foregrounds in Magit/diff-mode

`diff-mode` and Magit diff buffers now affect the text colour of the
added/removed/changed lines to improve their usability.  Before, the
combination was of a colour-coded background with the main foreground,
which could make it a bit harder to track lines.


### Removed the bold weight from Magit diff hunk headings

Inactive diff hunk headings do not need to be bold, as they are
already easy to tell apart from their context.  The added bold is
useful for the currently selected diff hunk, as it draws attention to
it.


### Revised all mail-related semantic colour mappings

Buffers such as those of viewing messages with Notmuch, Mu4e, Gnus
have more appropriate colour combinations in the interest of avoiding
exaggerations.  Same for the message composition buffers (e.g. what we
get with the `compose-mail` command and its email-client-specific
counterparts).


### The background of Notmuch message headers is more noticeable

The `notmuch` email client for Emacs has a thread-based view of
messages where each email starts with its own header.  The slightly
more noticeable background makes it easier to discern where a new
message starts.


### Added support for the powerline package

I added support for this package because other packages depend on it.
Note though that I have encountered visual glitches with `powerline`.
Those occur while switching themes and require a re-run of the
Powerline setup with `M-x powerline-reset`.


### Removed the background colour from `consult` lines

The default value of `consult-line-number-prefix` inherits from the
`line-number` face.  The Ef themes make the latter inherit from
`default` in order to have the lines increase/decrease in font size
when the user calls the `text-scale-adjust` command.  This arrangement
meant that Consult was implicitly getting the main background which
caused commands like `consult-line` to not be highlighted from their
absolute beginning but only after the line number.

Thanks to Daniel Mendler for bringing this matter to my attention:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3Cb03413a6-cb77-615d-145d-db4eb710bfca%40daniel-mendler.de%3E>.


### Defined `consult-file` to look the same as file names in Grep buffers

This face is used when the user option `vertico-group-format` is set
to nil.  With this change, we keep things consistent in the common
workflow of using `consult-grep` and exporting to a grep buffer via
`embark-export`.  The packages involved are `vertico`, `consult`,
`embark`.

Thanks to Daniel Mendler for bringing this matter to my attention:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/%3Cb03413a6-cb77-615d-145d-db4eb710bfca%40daniel-mendler.de%3E#%3C37f01118-1102-d0a9-ce8d-5101f3d44679@daniel-mendler.de%3E>.


### Made `eglot-diagnostic-tag-unnecessary-face` a warning

By default it inherits the `shadow` face, which makes it
counter-intuitive as it dims the text instead of bringing it to our
attention.  The intent of `eglot-diagnostic-tag-unnecessary-face` is
to highlight unused symbols, so this is better presented as an
informational warning.

Thanks to Augusto Stoffel for bringing this matter to my attention.
This was done via a private channel and the information is shared with
permission.


### Configured `dashboard` icons to retain their underlying colour

The default value of the `dashboard-items-face` made all icons use the
same colour, detracting from their distinctiveness.  Thanks to Thanos
Apollo for bringing this matter to my attention.  It was done via a
private channel and the information is shared with permission.


### Removed the bold weight from Org agenda deadline/scheduled

This makes agenda buffers less noisy.  The original intent was to
differentiate current/imminent from past/future items, though I feel
that was the wrong design.  We first want to deal with current tasks
and do not want to feel overwhelmed by the design.


### Removed the bold weight from regular expression constructs

This was used for escaped parentheses and the like.  It was making
certain strings harder to read, such as:

    "\\(?:\\.\\(?:m\\(?:kv\\|p4\\)\\|ogg\\|webm\\)\\)"


### Retrieve any colour value from the palette

[ This is for do-it-yourself users who need to apply colours in custom
  code they maintain.  As such, it is a bit technical.  Skip to the
  next heading if you are not such a user. ]

The fuction `ef-themes-get-color-value` can be called from Lisp to
return the value of a color from the active Ef theme palette.  It
takea a `COLOR` argument and an optional `OVERRIDES`.

`COLOR` is a symbol that represents a named color entry in the
palette.

<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes#h:8dd67bf5-879e-46e5-b277-5bac141f53d1>

If the value is the name of another color entry in the palette (so a
mapping), this function recurs until it finds the underlying color
value.

With an optional `OVERRIDES` argument as a non-nil value, it accounts
for palette overrides.  Else it reads only the default palette.

<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes#h:4b923795-4b23-4345-81e5-d1c108a84b6a>

With optional `THEME` as a symbol among `ef-themes-collection`, use
the palette of that item.  Else use the current Ef theme.

If `COLOR` is not present in the palette, this function returns the
`unspecified` symbol, which is safe when used as a face attribute's
value.

An example with `ef-summer` to show how this function behaves
with/without overrides and when recursive mappings are introduced.

    ;; Here we show the recursion of palette mappings.  In general, it is
    ;; better for the user to specify named colors to avoid possible
    ;; confusion with their configuration, though those still work as
    ;; expected.
    (setq ef-themes-common-palette-overrides
          '((cursor red)
            (prompt cursor)
            (variable prompt)))

    ;; Ignore the overrides and get the original value.
    (ef-themes-get-color-value 'variable)
    ;; => "#5250ef"

    ;; Read from the overrides and deal with any recursion to find the
    ;; underlying value.
    (ef-themes-get-color-value 'variable :overrides)
    ;; => "#d3303a"


### Miscellaneous

-   Recalibrated the mouse hover background of the `ef-frost` theme to
    stand out a bit more than before.  This is a minor usability
    enhancement.

-   Revised the `keycast-key` face for easier use and thematic
    consistency.  It has a faint border around it but is otherwise
    consistent with what was present before.

-   Improved how the palette preview is rendered.

-   Made several internal tweaks that keep the code clean and reusable.

-   Clarified the wording of various statements in the manual.

-   Expanded the outline headings of all theme files.
