---
title: "Emacs: beframe version 0.3.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my beframe package for GNU Emacs.'
---

`beframe` enables a frame-oriented Emacs workflow where each frame has
access to the list of buffers visited therein.  In the interest of
brevity, we call buffers that belong to frames "beframed".

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `beframe`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/beframe>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/beframe-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/beframe>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/beframe>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/beframe>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-02-28-emacs-beframe-demo/>
+ Backronym: Buffers Encapsulated in Frames Realise Advanced
  Management of Emacs.

Below are the release notes

* * *

## Use more descriptive names for assume/unassume commands

Beframe limits the buffer list to buffers that are visited in the
current frame.  I provide commands to assume (add) or unassume
(remove) buffers from other frames, making for a powerful and flexible
workflow:

-   **In bulk:** Assume/unassume the (i) entire buffer list of a frame, or
    the (ii) consolidated buffer list of all frames.

-   **Selectively:** Use minibuffer completion to compile a list of
    buffers to assume/unassume (iii) from the given frame, or (iv)
    buffers from the consolidated buffer list.

The commands that operate selectively are renamed to better describe
what they do.  We thus have:

<table border="2" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="6" rules="groups" frame="hsides">


<colgroup>
<col  class="org-left" />

<col  class="org-left" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">Deprecated name</th>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">New name</th>
</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>
<tr>
<td class="org-left">beframe-assume-buffers</td>
<td class="org-left">beframe-assume-frame-buffers-selectively</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-left">beframe-assume-buffers-all-frames</td>
<td class="org-left">beframe-assume-buffers-selectively-all-frames</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-left">beframe-unassume-buffers</td>
<td class="org-left">beframe-unassume-current-frame-buffers-selectively</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

To avoid potential confusion, the following command aliases are
discontinued:

-   `beframe-add-buffers`
-   `beframe-remove-buffers`
-   `beframe-add-frame-buffers`
-   `beframe-remove-frame-buffers`


## Provide the `beframe-prefix-map`

This is a keymap that binds the Beframe commands to recommended keys.
As with all Emacs key bindings, those are configurable.

I call it a "prefix" keymap because it is not bound anywhere and
cannot be used by default.  The user must explicitly bind it to a key,
which will be treated as a prefix key.  For example:

```elisp
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c b") beframe-prefix-map)
```

With the above code, `C-c b` becomes the prefix key that invokes
Beframe commands.  Type `C-c b C-h` to show the available key
bindings (by default `C-h` as a suffix to an incomplete key sequence
produces a Help buffer that links to all the available bindings).

The `beframe-prefix-map` and `beframe-mode` are used independent of
each other.


## Miscellaneous

-   Simplify how `beframe-rename-function` is added by the
    `beframe-mode`.
-   Refine the application of `beframe-create-frame-scratch-buffer` by
    the `beframe-mode`.
-   Tweak the `beframe-buffer-sort-visibility` function to be consistent
    with the style of `beframe.el`.
-   Rewrite parts of the manual to reference the aforementioned.
