---
title: 'Emacs: aLtCaPs version 1.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my text-transformation package for GNU Emacs.  It helps convey sarcasm or mockery.'
---

The `altcaps` package is a small, focused-in-scope tool that helps
users communicate mockery or sarcasm effectively.  It does this by
alternating the letter casing of characters in the words it affects.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `altcaps`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/altcaps>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/altcaps-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/altcaps>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/altcaps>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/altcaps>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues>
+ Backronyms: Alternating Letters Transform Casual Asides to Playful
  Statements.  ALTCAPS Lets Trolls Convert Aphorisms to Proper
  Shitposts.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Breaking change to the value of `altcaps-force-character-casing`

This user option enforces the specified letter casing for the given
character.  The value is an alist.  In previous versions, the `car` of
each cell was a character type, whereas now it is a string type.
Concretely, the old value was expressed like this:

```elisp
;; Old value
(setq altcaps-force-character-casing
      '((?i . downcase)
        (?l . upcase)))
```

It becomes:

```elisp
;; New value
(setq altcaps-force-character-casing
      '(("i" . downcase)
        ("l" . upcase)))
```

At least based on my correspondence, strings are easier for users.
The notation for characters causes confusion.


## The public `altcaps-transform` function

This is the function that performs the alternating letter casing, while
also respecting the user option `altcaps-force-character-casing`.  The
function is more efficient now.  Use it in Lisp with a single string
argument, like this:

```elisp
(altcaps-transform "Your wish is my command")
;; => yOuR wIsH iS mY cOmMaNd
```

The above return value is consistent with the default settings.  With
`altcaps-force-character-casing` bound, we can affect the output thus:

```elisp
(setq altcaps-force-character-casing
      '(("i" . downcase)
        ("m" . upcase)))

(altcaps-transform "Your wish is my command")
;; => yOuR wiSh iS My CoMMaNd
```

## Characters without casing no longer matter

Before, the algorithm was toggling the letter casing of virtually
every character.  This means that a string like `"a.c"` was wrongly
treated as a sequence of three characters with letter casing, so the
program was trying to do this:

    a => downcase
    . => upcase
    c => downcase

Whereas now, the transformation skips characters without letter
casing:

    a => downcase
    . => i Am ThE iNtElLiGeNtSiA nOw
    c => upcase


## The `altcaps-replace` is superseded by `altcaps-replace-region`

The `altcaps-replace` was not sufficiently abstract, making the code a
bit repetitive.  The new `altcaps-replace-region` is efficient in that
regard.

The arity of the two functions is different: `altcaps-replace` was
accepting one required argument plus an optional one, while
`altcaps-replace-region` takes three arguments at all times.  Please
consult its doc string before adapting it to your code.
