---
title: 'Emacs: mct version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my mct package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Enhancements for the default minibuffer completion UI of Emacs.  In
essence, MCT is (i) a very thin layer of interactivity on top of the
out-of-the-box completion experience, and (ii) glue code that combines
built-in functionalities to make the default completion framework work
like that of more featureful third-party options.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `mct`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/mct>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/mct>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/general-issues>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2021-10-22-emacs-mct-demo/>
+ Backronym: Minibuffer Confines Transcended; Minibuffer and
  Completions in Tandem.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Resumption of MCT development

In April 2022, I announced that I was discontinuing the development of
my `mct` package.  At the time, Emacs 29 was gaining new MCT-like
capabilities and I thought we would quickly reach a point where my
package would be superseded by built-in functionality.  The article I
published at the time:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-04-14-emacs-discontinue-mct/>.

About a year later and after receiving questions about MCT, I decided
to restart its development.  This was done in light of the realisation
that the built-in Emacs functionality was still not as opinionated as
MCT.  There are good reasons for this state of affairs, due to the
legacy of this important User Interface element and Emacs' policy to
not break stuff willy nilly.  Still, the fact remains that MCT can fit
in a very narrow niche for those who (i) like the built-in completions
and (ii) appreciate a few extra niceties.  What I wrote in March, 2023:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-03-25-emacs-restart-mct-development/>.

What does MCT offer that the built-in Emacs UI does not?  In short:

-   MCT provides a facility for "live completions", to automatically
    update the `*Completions*` buffer given certain conditions.  A
    number of user options control the specifics.

-   There are user options for a passlist and blocklist, which determine
    what should automatically display the `*Completions*` buffer and be
    live updated.  The passlist and the blocklist can target individual
    commands, such as `find-file`, as well as completion categories like
    `buffer`.  The manual includes a section with several known
    completion categories.

To be clear: MCT builds on top of the built-in functionality and
should not compete with it.  Depending on my availability, I will try
to prepare patches for emacs.git to see whether at least some features
can be added directly to `mnibuffer.el` or related.


## MCT supports Emacs 29 or higher

MCT is highly opinionated about how the completions should work.  This
applies to the presentation of the completion candidates as well as
the behaviour of commands that cycle between the minibuffer and the
`*Completions*`, treating the two as a contiguous space.  In previous
versions of Emacs, MCT could not work exactly as intended due to
limitations in the underlying framework.  For example, the variable
`completions-format` gained the `one-column` value only in Emacs 28:
Emacs 27 supported grid views which are not intuitive as a vertical
list for up-down cycling between the candidates.

To make things easier to maintain, MCT only works with Emacs 29 or
higher.  The ~1 year hiatus has hopefully given users enough time to
assess their options.


## Deprecation of `mct-region-mode`

For a while, MCT supported in-buffer completion via a minor mode that
would add all the needed functionality.  This was always problematic
due to underlying constrains and is thus no longer supported.  MCT is
designed to work exclusively with the minibuffer, where the behaviour
is more reliable.

Nevertheless, users can still get an MCT-like experience with these
settings, which affect the default UI (modify as you see fit):

    ;; Get the key bindings
    (let ((map completion-in-region-mode-map))
      (define-key map (kbd "C-n") #'minibuffer-next-completion)
      (define-key map (kbd "C-p") #'minibuffer-previous-completion)
      (define-key map (kbd "RET") #'minibuffer-choose-completion))

    ;; Tweak the appearance
    (setq completions-format 'one-column)
    (setq completion-show-help nil)
    (setq completion-auto-help t)

    ;; Optionally, tweak the appearance further
    (setq completions-detailed t)
    (setq completion-show-inline-help nil)
    (setq completions-max-height 6)
    (setq completions-highlight-face 'completions-highlight)


## The `mct-minibuffer-mode` is renamed to `mct-mode`

The `mct-mode` was the original name, which was later given the
"minibuffer" specifier to disambiguate it from the aforementioned
`mct-region-mode`.  With the latter gone, this qualification is no
longer pertinent and the original name can be restored.


## The `completing-read-multiple` indicator has been removed

Previous versions of MCT would prepend a `[CRM]` tag to the minibuffer
prompt of commands powered by `completing-read-multiple`.  While this
is a nice usability enhancement, it is not specific to MCT and thus
should not be part of `mct.el`.  Use this in your init file instead:

    ;; Add prompt indicator to `completing-read-multiple'.  We display
    ;; [`completing-read-multiple': <separator>], e.g.,
    ;; [`completing-read-multiple': ,] if the separator is a comma.  This
    ;; is adapted from the README of the `vertico' package by Daniel
    ;; Mendler.  I made some small tweaks to propertize the segments of
    ;; the prompt.
    (defun crm-indicator (args)
      (cons (format "[`crm-separator': %s]  %s"
                    (propertize
                     (replace-regexp-in-string
                      "\\`\\[.*?]\\*\\|\\[.*?]\\*\\'" ""
                      crm-separator)
                     'face 'error)
                    (car args))
            (cdr args)))

    (advice-add #'completing-read-multiple :filter-args #'crm-indicator)


## No more IDO-like file navigation

Older versions of MCT had a command for file navigation that would
delete the whole directory component before point, effectively going
back up one directory.  While the functionality can be useful, it is not
integral to the MCT experience and thus should not belong in `mct.el`.
Add this to your own configuration file instead:

    ;; Adaptation of `icomplete-fido-backward-updir'.
    (defun my-backward-updir ()
      "Delete char before point or go up a directory."
      (interactive nil mct-mode)
      (cond
       ((and (eq (char-before) ?/)
             (eq (mct--completion-category) 'file))
        (when (string-equal (minibuffer-contents) "~/")
          (delete-minibuffer-contents)
          (insert (expand-file-name "~/"))
          (goto-char (line-end-position)))
        (save-excursion
          (goto-char (1- (point)))
          (when (search-backward "/" (minibuffer-prompt-end) t)
            (delete-region (1+ (point)) (point-max)))))
       (t (call-interactively 'backward-delete-char))))

    (define-key minibuffer-local-filename-completion-map (kbd "DEL") #'my-backward-updir)


## Lots of changes under the hood

I do not intend to refashion MCT.  It works the way it was originally
intended to.  What I did is to streamline the code for compatibility
with Emacs 29 and tweak the custom commands to preserve the desired
cyclic behaviour between the minibuffer and the `*Completions*`.

Experiments such as integration with the `avy` package or the ability
to type-to-complete in the `*Completions*` buffer are abandoned.

Do not expect radical changes henceforth.  I shall monitor and/or
contribute to developments in core Emacs and am happy to forever
archive MCT if/when the default completion UI gains the capabilities
that, I think, make the user experience a little bit easier.
