---
title: 'Emacs: logos version 1.1.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my logos package for GNU Emacs.'
---

This package provides a simple approach to setting up a "focus mode"
for Emacs.  It uses the `page-delimiter` (typically the `^L`
character) or the `outline-regexp` together with some commands to move
between pages whether narrowing is in effect or not.  It also provides
some optional stylistic tweaks which come into effect when the
buffer-local `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  The manual shows how to
extend the code to achieve the desired result.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `logos`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/logos>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/logos>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-11-emacs-logos-demo/>
+ Backronyms: `^L` Only Generates Ostensible Slides; Logos Optionally Goes through Outline Sections

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## The `logos-focus-mode-extra-functions` has a new name

It is now called `logos-focus-mode-hook` to conform with the
conventions surrounding Emacs Lisp packaging.  The old name is
deprecated and will be removed in the future.  The relevant warnings
are in place to inform users of the change.

The `logos-focus-mode-extra-functions` had the unfortunate connotation
of being an irregular hook, i.e. one that runs with arguments.
Whereas this one is a regular hook that passes no arguments to the
functions it calls.  Quoting from the Emacs Lisp Reference Manual:

> If the hook variable’s name does not end with ‘-hook’, that indicates
> it is probably an “abnormal hook”.  These differ from normal hooks in
> two ways: they can be called with one or more arguments, and their
> return values can be used in some way.  The hook’s documentation says
> how the functions are called and how their return values are used.  Any
> functions added to an abnormal hook must follow the hook’s calling
> convention.  By convention, abnormal hook names end in ‘-functions’.

To read the manual, evaluate this inside of Emacs:

```elisp
(info "(elisp) Hooks")
```


## The `logos-page-delimiter` variable/function is now public

Renaming the `logos-page-delimiter` function and variable is necessary
as both can safely be included in user-defined code.

In the context of Elisp packaging, a "private" symbol is denoted by a
double dash in its name.  Such code is intended for internal use: it
may be redefined or altogether removed without further notice.
Whereas a "public" symbol comes with the implicit guarantee that the
developer will take good care to preserve its behaviour and/or
document any breaking changes.


## Functions that set state have a more descriptive name

This concerns `logos--mode`, hereby renamed to `logos-set-mode-arg`,
and `logos--set`, which is now called `logos-set-buffer-local-value`.

The intent is to make the code public as well as to better describe
what it does already at the naming level.

As always, the relevant arrangements are in place to notify users of
the change.


## The Git repository also includes a README.md

The project has a `README.org` file which contains the project's
documentation and is exported to the Info page format.  A new
`README.md` is supplied as well to provide the basics of what `logos`
is, link to its video demo, and further resources.

Thanks to Dave Abrahams for asking me to put a video demo in the
README.  This inspired me to update this repository to be in the style
of the others I also maintain.  Dave's comment was made in issue 12 on
the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos/issues/12>.
