---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 2.2.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>.
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

The present version covers four broad themes:

1.  Denote rename commands are more user-friendly and featureful.
2.  An optional sorting facility makes it possible to produce a
    filtered and sorted Dired buffer with Denote files.
3.  The optional Denote Org dynamic blocks have received a lot of attention.
4.  Bug fixes and internal refinements.

[ Remember that you do not need to be a programmer to contribute to
  Denote. Report a bug, make a suggestion, or just describe how you
  want to use this package. Every idea counts and we may implement it
  if we can. ]


## The rename commands can remove a Denote file name component

The commands we provide to rename files using the Denote file-naming
scheme---`denote-rename-file`, `denote-dired-rename-files`, and
`denote-dired-rename-marked-files-with-keywords`---can now remove
Denote file name components. This is done by providing an empty string
at the relevant prompt.

For example, to remove the `TITLE` component from a file called
`20231209T110322==sig--title__keywords.ext` we provide an empty string
at the title prompt. The end result will look something like this:
`20231209T110322==sig__keywords.ext`.

All prompts now include a hint that leaving them empty will ignore the
given field if it does not exist or remove it if it does exist.

Note that you must **check how to input an empty string** with your
minibuffer user interface of choice. For instance, with the `vertico`
package you can do that with the `M-RET` key binding or by selecting
the prompt line directly (notice the counter showing something like
`*/5` instead of `1/5`). Please make sure to consult the documentation
of the package you are using as this behaviour is not controlled by
Denote. Vertico, and others like it, selects the first candidate if
you type `RET` without any input, which is not the same as an empty
string&#x2014;it is the first candidate.

Also read the Denote manual on the matter of [Renaming
files](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:532e8e2a-9b7d-41c0-8f4b-3c5cbb7d4dca).
In short, we use this facility to name all our files, regardless of
file type, in a consistent way that makes them easier to find (I do
this with my videos, for example, and I do it across my filesystem for
all personal files).


## The file-to-be-renamed is easier to read in the minibuffer

The commands `denote-rename-file` and `denote-dired-rename-files`
show the name of the file they are operating on in the minibuffer
prompt. This is now produced relative to the current directory,
meaning that instead of `/some/rather/long/path/to/file-name.txt`
Denote only displays `file-name.txt`.

Our rename commands never move files to another directory, anyway, so
we do not need to remind the user of the entire file system path.

To make things easier for users/themes, file names highlighted in
Denote prompts are fontified with either of following faces,
depending on the specifics of the case:

-   `denote-faces-prompt-old-name`
-   `denote-faces-prompt-new-name`
-   `denote-faces-prompt-current-name`

These faces inherit the attributes of basic faces, so they should look
decent without further tweaks across all themes.


## Prompts for title, keywords, and signature accept an empty string

The prompts defined by Denote that apply to file name components all
accept an empty string. This has the effect of skipping the given
component. For example, we can create a file without a title and
keywords, with the following sequence of actions (I assume you are
using `vertico` for the minibuffer user interface):

-   Type `M-x denote`.
-   Type `M-RET` at the title prompt to input an empty string.
-   Now type `M-RET` at the keywords prompt for another empty string.

The resulting file name is something like `20231209T110950.org`.


## Dired with sorting and filtering

The new optional `denote-sort.el` library provides facilities to sort
Denote files by any of their file name components. Users can benefit
from this facility to produce a filtered and sorted listing of Denote
files with the command `denote-sort-dired`.

`denote-sort-dired` produces a fully fledged Dired buffer. It asks for a
regular expression that matches file names in the `denote-directory`.
It then prompts for a sort key and finally checks with the user
whether to reverse the order or not.

[ Do not be discouraged by the term &ldquo;regular expression&rdquo;. Ordinary
  words work fine. Plus, with Denote&rsquo;s file-naming scheme we have
  semantics such as `_keyword`, `-title`, `=signature`, as explained
  in the manual. This is the whole point of using a thoughtful naming
  scheme. ]

The resulting Dired listing is flat, meaning that files inside of
subdirectories are bundled together with those present at the root of
the `denote-directory`. In this case, files inside of a subdirectory
include the directory component as a prefix. So we have something like
this:

    test-subdir/20230320T105950--a-new-note__testing.txt
    20231202T095629--rename-works-as-intended__one_test_two.org

I think this is a killer feature, as the fully fledged Dired buffer
allows us to perform all supported operations on our Denote
sorted+filtered files (e.g. change file permissions, move files to
another directory, or open them in an external application).

I recorded a video to show how this works:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-12-04-emacs-denote-sort-mechanism/>.

[ Remember that we can rename any file using the Denote file-naming
  scheme, meaning that our files can include stuff like PDFs and
  videos. Combine this with the concept of &ldquo;silos&rdquo;, which is covered
  in the Denote manual, to organise your long-term storage and
  retrieve it efficiently. ]


## Combine contents of files with an Org dynamic block

The new `denote-files` Org dynamic block produces a continuous stream
of file contents. It joins together the contents of files inside the
`denote-directory` whose name matches the given regular expression.
Optional parameters control whether to include links to those files,
omit their front matter, sort by a given file name component, or tweak
the separator between each file&rsquo;s contents.

I produced a video to demonstrate the functionality:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-11-25-emacs-denote-org-dynamic-blocks/>.

Use the command `denote-org-dblock-insert-files` to insert such a
block directly at point. Read the Denote manual for the
technicalities: [Org dynamic block to insert file contents](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:f15fa143-5036-416f-9bff-1bcabbb03456).

[ Videos I do will eventually be out-of-date. The manual is the source
  of truth. ]

Bear in mind that this feature is not &ldquo;transclusion&rdquo;. We are simply
printing a copy of the contents of the files in the current buffer.
Changes made to this copy are not reflected in the original files.

The `denote-files` Org dynamic block is an excellent way to quickly
collect your thoughts on a given topic. Although dynamic blocks are a
feature of Org, the contents of the files do not need to be in Org
syntax (I write most of my notes in plain text (`.txt`)).

Thanks to Claudiu Tănăselia for proposing this idea and discussing it
with me. This was done via a private channel and the information is
shared with permission.


## Sort parameters are used in all Denote Org dynamic blocks

All Denote Org dynamic blocks make use of `denote-sort.el` (described
further above). It powers the `:sort-by-component` and `:reverse-sort`
parameters.

Thanks to Glenna D. for suggesting this feature and discussing it with
me. This was done via a private channel and the information is shared
with permission. It is what inspired me to start work on
`denote-sort.el`, which I then extended to cover Dired, as noted
above.


## The `:missing-only` parameter is removed from Org dynamic blocks

I am removing it because the underlying functionality of
`denote-add-missing-links` was not always reliable.


## Files with signature are linked appropriately in Org dynamic blocks

In general, we provide the command `denote-link-with-signature` to let
the user pick a file that has a signature and link to it. The
description of such a link contains the signature text as well as the
file title. The `denote-link-with-signature` is distinct from the
standard `denote-link`, as it allows the user to express intent about
the inclusion of the signature.

In Org dynamic blocks for links/backlinks, we make this happen
automatically since there can be no manual intervention to express
intent on a link-by-link basis.


## Fontification in Dired can now extend to subdirectories

The user option `denote-dired-directories` activates the
`denote-dired-mode` in the specified list of directories when the user
sets this in their init file:

```elisp
(add-hook 'dired-mode-hook #'denote-dired-mode-in-directories)
```

The new user option `denote-dired-directories-include-subdirectories`
extends the reach of this feature to all subdirectories thereof.

Thanks to Henrik Hörmann for discussing this with me and contributing
a patch. This was originally done in pull request 191 on the GitHub
mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/191>. Subsequent
refinements by me.


## Signatures are sluggified as intended

The file name signature component is now sluggified properly. This
means that multiple words are separated by the equals sign, in
accordance with the Denote file-naming scheme where a word separator
is the same as the given field separator (this is the low-tech feature
that makes Denote files so easy to retrieve without fancy extras).

Vedang Manerikar fixed two relevant bugs in the &ldquo;rename&rdquo; commands,
while I rewrote internal functions and tests in the interest of consistency. Vedang&rsquo;s patches: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/46790>.

[ The &ldquo;signature&rdquo; is a free form component of the file name. Users can
  add anything they want there, such as to use it as a &ldquo;category&rdquo; that
  is different from &ldquo;tags/keywords&rdquo;, or to introduce sequences in
  their notes, or to just have an extra marker for files they need to
  spot quickly. ]


## For developers

There is a section in the manual titled &ldquo;For developers or advanced
users&rdquo;. There we document functions or variables that are
public-facing, meaning that we test and document their behaviour and
encourage others to use them for code they write on top of Denote.
Refer to this section if you are looking to extend Denote. Though you
can also just check the source code, which is designed to be readable
and hackable.

-   The `denote-directory-files` function gains new functionality that
    subsumes that of the now-deprecated functions
    `denote-directory-files-matching-regexp`, `denote-all-files`,
    `denote-directory-text-only-files`. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné
    Guay for the contribution, which was done in pull request 195 on the
    GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/195>.

-   The font-lock keywords we define are consolidated into a single
    variable: `denote-faces-file-name-keywords` instead of being split
    into two variables. This means that we cover all our fontification
    needs in the backlinks buffer as well as the `denote-dired-mode`
    with this one point of entry. It also works for `denote-sort-dired`,
    which can include files with their subdirectory component in the
    same flat listing.

-   Use the function `denote-retrieve-filename-keywords` to extract
    keywords from the file name alone, without going into the file
    contents.

-   The `denote-retrieve-filename-title` function now returns an empty
    string if no title is present. Its behaviour is thus consistent with
    `denote-retrieve-filename-keywords` and `denote-retrieve-filename-signature`.

-   The `denote-retrieve-filename-title` will now use the
    `file-name-base` function as a fallback subject to a non-nil
    optional argument. This case come into effect when the file does not
    have a title component. The new optional argument allows the caller
    to handle such cases as they see fit.

-   The `denote-signature-prompt` and `denote-title-prompt` functions
    accept an optional `DEFAULT-SIGNATURE` or `DEFAULT-TITLE` argument.
    Internally, this is used as the `INITIAL-INPUT` of `completing-read`
    instead of the `DEF` argument. This matters because we want the
    prompt to return an empty string if there is no input, whereas the
    presence of `DEF` means that `DEF` is returned when the prompt is
    empty.

-   All our functions that interactively match file names with a regular
    expression now use the `denote-files-matching-regexp-prompt`
    function. When called from Lisp, it takes a `REGEXP` argument as
    well as an optional `PROMPT-TEXT`.

For the purposes of this release cycle, I am not documenting the
points of entry provided by `denote-sort.el`. It is a new feature that
I may eventually incorporate in `denote.el`. If you are interested in
the functionality (e.g. to have more elaborate sorting algorithms),
please take a look at the source code and then let us discuss the
implementation details.


## Miscellaneous

-   Rewrote the manual on the topic of Org dynamic blocks. Same idea for
    practically the entirety of `denote-org-dblock.el`.

-   Marked the interactive specification of a few commands with the
    major mode they belong to. This means that `M-X` (note the capital
    X), which calls `execute-extended-command-for-buffer` by default,
    will only show those commands in the relevant context.

-   Made internal refinements and simplified the implementation of a few
    functions. This is important work to keep the code base clean and
    easy to read/maintain. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the
    contribution. It was done in pull request 193 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/193>.

-   Improved the doc string of the `denote-format-file-name` function.
    Also introduced a unit test for it to be sure it does what we expect
    (I eventually want to have tests for everything we do, but this is a
    long-term project).


## Git commits

Just an overview of what we did. Thanks again to everyone involved.

    ~/Git/Projects/denote $ git shortlog 2.1.0..2.2.0 --summary --numbered
       125	Protesilaos Stavrou
        17	Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
         2	Vedang Manerikar
         1	Henrik Hörmann


## Policy for the next development cycle

I will give a ~1 week pause on Denote development before making any
feature changes. This is to ensure that we catch possible bugs and
push fixes right away. If there are other changes in place, it is not
possible to make point updates of this sort, as we must first wait for
the new features to be tested in real-world scenaria.
