---
title: 'Emacs: modus-themes version 4.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published the latest stable release of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The change log
entry is reproduced further below.  It is a long read.  For any
questions, feel welcome to [contact me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will now patch emacs.git so please wait a little longer for the
updates to trickle down to you.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `modus-themes` (also built into Emacs 28+)
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-changelog>
+ Colour palette: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-colors>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Backronym: My Old Display Unexpectedly Sharpened ... themes

* * *

This is the biggest release in the history of the project.
Previously, a new version would consist of about 100 commits to the
Git repository.  This one includes 400+ of them in the span of one
month.  The out-of-the-box looks of the themes are largely the same as
before, though I have made a lot of internal changes that affect how
the themes are instantiated and customised.

As part of this development cycle, I produced publications informing
users of the upcoming changes, while demonstrating the new feature of
overriding the colour palette and its semantic mappings.

-   **2022-12-03 Emacs: breaking changes coming to 'modus-themes' version 4:** <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-12-03-modus-themes-v4-development/>
-   **2022-12-07 Emacs: change colour values and mappings in Modus themes version 4:** <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-12-07-modus-themes-4-colour-values-mappings/>
-   **2022-12-17 Emacs: modus-themes version 4 demo [video]:** <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-12-17-modus-themes-v4-demo/>
-   **2022-12-28 Emacs: note for MELPA or Git users of the Modus themes ahead of version 4:** <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-12-28-note-modus-themes-4-melpa/>

I did this in the hope of preparing users for the refactored Modus
themes, though I understand that not everyone has had the chance to
consult those entries.  The general idea is that **old custom code will
not work** and most user options are either removed or confined to a
more precise scope.

Custom code will not work because the named colours of the palettes
have changed.  Many user options are made redundant by the new
overrides' system.  Specifically, if an option pertains to
colouration, it is now done via overrides instead of the old method of
me hardcoding styles (e.g. for stuff like "rainbow" headings).

More details below.  This is a long entry.  Please take your time to
study it before upgrading to the new version of the themes.


## There now are six Modus themes for more legibility needs

Quoting from the manual's "Overview" section:

> The Modus themes consist of six themes, divided into three subgroups.
>
> -   **Main themes:** `modus-operandi` is the project's main light theme,
>     while `modus-vivendi` is its dark counterpart.  These two themes are
>     part of the project since its inception.  They are designed to cover
>     a broad range of needs and are, in the opinion of the author, the
>     reference for what a highly legible "default" theme should look
>     like.
>
> -   **Tinted themes:** `modus-operandi-tinted` and `modus-vivendi-tinted`
>     are variants of the two main themes.  They slightly tone down the
>     intensity of the background and provide a bit more color variety.
>     `modus-operandi-tinted` has a set of base tones that are shades of
>     light ochre (earthly colors), while `modus-vivendi-tinted` gives a
>     night sky impression.
>
> -   **Deuteranopia themes:** `modus-operandi-deuteranopia` and its
>     companion `modus-vivendi-deuteranopia` are optimized for users with
>     red-green color deficiency.  This means that they do not use red and
>     green hues for color-coding purposes, such as for diff removed and
>     added lines.  Instead, they implement colors that are discernible by
>     users with deueteranopia or deuteranomaly (mostly yellow and blue
>     hues).

All six themes will be included in Emacs 30 (`modus-operandi` and
`modus-vivendi` are in Emacs since August 2020).  I asked about it on
the emacs-devel mailing list and received the approval of Eli
Zaretskii, one of the Emacs maintainers.  The full thread:
<https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2022-12/msg00834.html>.


### New command to select one of the Modus themes

The `modus-themes-select` command uses minibuffer completion to load
one of the six themes in the collection.  Loading a Modus theme
disables all other Modus themes.

NOTE that Emacs can load multiple themes, which typically produces
undesirable results and undoes the work of the designer.  Use the
`disable-theme` command if you are trying other themes beside the
Modus collection.


### New user option to specify themes to toggle

The `modus-themes-to-toggle` is a variable that affects the command
`modus-themes-toggle`.  By default, the toggling happens between the
`modus-operandi` and `modus-vivendi` themes, as was always the case.
Though with the addition of new themes, it is possible to change this
to something like:

    (setq modus-themes-to-toggle '(modus-operandi-deuteranopia modus-vivendi-deuteranopia))

If `modus-themes-to-toggle` does not specify two Modus themes, the
`modus-themes-toggle` command will prompt with completion for a theme
among the collection (this is practically the same as the aforementioned
`modus-themes-select` command).


## Colour palettes and their overrides are much more powerful

In previous versions, there were options to override colour values.
Those were difficult to use as they (i) required expertise on picking
the correct values and (ii) it was not clear which colour was used
where.

The new version broadens the colour palette to include **named colours**
and **semantic colour mappings**.  Named colours are associations
between a symbol and a colour value, such as `(blue-warmer "#354fcf")`.
While semantic colour mappings apply those named colours to specific
constructs such as `(heading-2 yellow-faint)` for all level 2 headings.

What this means is that overrides can now be targeted at semantic
mappings as well to refashion practically every aspect of the themes.
The manual provides lots of examples that can be copied and used
directly.  For example, it is possible to change the sequence of
colours in headings so that, say, there is a colour-coding that
denotes depth.  Links to relevant entries are included in this
document.

The `modus-themes-common-palette-overrides` user option contains
entries that are shared between all the themes.  While there also
exist theme-specific options such as `modus-operandi-palette-overrides`.

For technical insight into the palette overrides, consult the manual:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:34c7a691-19bb-4037-8d2f-67a07edab150>.

For practical examples check "Stylistic variants using palette
overrides" and its subsections:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:df1199d8-eaba-47db-805d-6b568a577bf3>.


## Preset overrides for faint or intense colouration

The palette overrides are comprehensive and can be tweaked in a
detailed way.  Still, users may prefer to use the presets for a
"faint" or "intense" style.  These presets showcase the new feature by
styling elements that were previously not subject to configuration.
They also provide the convenience of a common set of stylistic
patterns.

Read the "Palette override presets" section in the manual for how to
use and/or extend those:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:b0bc811c-227e-42ec-bf67-15e1f41eb7bc>.


## Named colours are more meaningful

In the past, the variants of the main accent colours were named like:

-   `red`
-   `red-alt`
-   `red-alt-other`

The improved naming scheme changes those to:

-   `red`
-   `red-warmer`
-   `red-cooler`

Semantically, the "warmer" variants have more yellow or red while the
"cooler" ones have greater contribution of cyan or blue.  As such, the
user can expect `green-warmer` to be an olive green and `green-cooler`
to be that of the pine (though olive trees can have blue-green
colouration and pine trees can be "warmer", but I digress).

Named colours can be previewed with the commands
`modus-themes-list-colors` (alias `modus-themes-preview-colors`) and
`modus-themes-list-colors-current` (alias
`modus-themes-preview-colors-current`).

Those commands accept a `C-u` prefix argument, in which case they show
the semantic colour mappings.


## Rationalisation of the colour palette

In previous versions, there were a lot of named colours that were
added ad-hoc, such as `fg-special-cold` and `bg-special-calm-faint`.
There was no clear design pattern behind them, nor was it obvious
where those colours should be used.  Furthermore, there were colours
that were reserved for the various permutations of user options.

This was too complex for users who wanted/needed to refashion aspects
of the themes.  It was also difficult to maintain.

The new palettes are more streamlined and their application is more
predictable.  This only matters to users who tweak the themes: it
makes their life easier, although it does render inapplicable any
previous custom code.


## Deprecation of user options

The following subsections explain the topics in further detail.  The
general idea for this change is that palette overrides provide a more
powerful, more flexible, and less complex alternative.  The code base
is considerably smaller.

With overrides, I can now provide support to cases such as:

-   Users who need different sets of greys as their monitor has
    inadequate colour reproduction (this is much more common than you
    think).
-   Users who want to make individual elements stand out, such as to
    turn the delimiters of Org source blocks (the `#+begin_src` and
    `#+end_src` lines) into, say, a shade of red.
-   Users who want to tone down the `TODO` and `DONE` keywords while
    making headings more colourful.  Or the inverse, or any combination
    in-between the extremes.
-   Users who want Org property drawers to be more colourful but inline
    code to be faint.

You get the idea&#x2026;  All these and many more are now possible.
Whereas in the past I would either have to tell people that it is not
possible or hardcode a stylistic alternative via user options, thus
further complicating the code base.

Catering to all those use-cases is important due to the maximalist
scope of the Modus themes: I cannot tell people to use another theme,
because here is where they come for their legibility needs.  This is
consistent with my experience that accessibility is not a
one-size-fits-all and that the most accessible design is that which is
flexible, ceteris paribus.


### `modus-themes-intense-mouseovers`

This user option would amplify the background colour of mouse hover
effects (technically, the `highlight` and `mode-line-highlight`
faces).  It always used a blue colour.

The same effect can now be achieved via overrides, except it is now
possible to use any background colour or level of intensity that is
provided by the themes' palette.  The manual provides concrete
examples: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:b5cab69d-d7cb-451c-8ff9-1f545ceb6caf>.


### `modus-themes-org-agenda`

This was a complex user option that was hard to test, document, and
maintain.  Most aspects of the Org agenda can be affected via
overrides, as demonstrated in the manual:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:a5af0452-a50f-481d-bf60-d8143f98105f>.


### `modus-themes-fringes`

This user option provided two shades of grey and the option for an
invisible background for the Emacs fringe.  The same and better can be
done via overrides, as shown in the manual:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:c312dcac-36b6-4a1f-b1f5-ab1c9abe27b0>.


### `modus-themes-lang-checkers`

This was another complex user option that offered several stylistic
variants of dubious value.  The main problem it had is that linter
highlights are often applied automatically, so any super intense style
becomes unusable.  Same when a file has lots of warnings/errors.

The semantic colour mappings I provide for this case are limited to
underlines, which I think is the most usable/legible design.  The
manual provides concrete examples on how to tweak those:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:03dbd5af-6bae-475e-85a2-cec189f69598>.


### `modus-themes-mode-line`

Yet another very complex user option that I removed in the interest of
maintainability.  All its stylistic permutations (and more) for
colours are possible via overrides:

-   **Make the mode line borderless:** <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:80ddba52-e188-411f-8cc0-480ebd75befe>
-   **Make the active mode line colorful:** <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:e8d781be-eefc-4a81-ac4e-5ed156190df7>

It is also possible to add padding to the mode line, though I explain
why this was always a dirty hack:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:5a0c58cc-f97f-429c-be08-927b9fbb0a9c>.


### `modus-themes-diffs`

I have redesigned all diff-related colours to improve their usability.
They are less intense than before, but still stand out clearly.  I am
purposefully not documenting how to use overrides here as I want users
to give this redesign a try.  We can always document and refine things
at a later point.


### `modus-themes-subtle-line-numbers`

This was a simple, but ultimately very limited option.  We can do much
better with overrides because we can tweak every aspect of this
interface without making the code more complex.  The manual shows how
to do it in style:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:b6466f51-cb58-4007-9ebe-53a27af655c7>.


### `modus-themes-markup`

This was a poorly named user option that only affected inline code
elements in prose.  The new semantic colour mappings provide more
points of entry and thus make it easier to tweak things to one's
liking (including tables, property drawers, source block delimiters
(the `#+begin_src` and `#+end_src` lines)), and more.  The manual
shows how:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:bb5b396f-5532-4d52-ab13-149ca24854f1>.


### `modus-themes-paren-match`

The colouration of matching parentheses of the `show-paren-mode` can
still be affected via overrides:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:259cf8f5-48ec-4b13-8a69-5d6387094468>.


### `modus-themes-syntax`

This was a user option that controlled the colouration of programming
modes.  We can reproduce it with overrides, except we now also have
the freedom to adapt things further:

-   **Make comments yellow and strings green:** <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:26f53daa-0065-48dc-88ab-6a718d16cd95>
-   **Make code syntax use the old alt-syntax style:** <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:c8767172-bf11-4c96-81dc-e736c464fc9c>
-   **Make use of alternative styles for code syntax:** <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:943063da-7b27-4ba4-9afe-f8fe77652fd1>


### `modus-themes-links`

The colouration of links can now be affected via palette overrides, as
documented in the manual:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:6c1d1dea-5cbf-4d92-b7bb-570a7a23ffe9>.


### `modus-themes-region`

Overrides can be used to affect the region's colouration and/or to
prevent the active region highlight from changing the underlying text
colour.  As always, the manual covers the details:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:c8605d37-66e1-42aa-986e-d7514c3af6fe>.


### `modus-themes-deuteranopia`

Instead of this rather limited option, users are advised to use the
new bespoke themes: `modus-operandi-deuteranopia` and
`modus-vivendi-deuteranopia`.  They are designed to cater to the needs
of people with red-green colour deficiency.


### `modus-themes-mail-citations`

All parts of an email composition buffer (per the standard
`message.el` library) are configurable via palette overrides.  Not
just citation lines, but also message headers.  The manual shows
several stylistic alternatives:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:7da7a4ad-5d3a-4f11-9796-5a1abed0f0c4>.

Note that apart from this change, I also redesigned several faces that
affect emails.  This was done in the interest of consistency and to
avoid some exaggerations.


### `modus-themes-tabs-accented`

I do not provide documentation on how to reproduce this style because
I think it was not widely used.  It is possible to do it with
overrides.  If anyone needs it, they are invited to contact me about
it.


### `modus-themes-box-buttons`

All "graphical" buttons use a proportionately spaced font
(`variable-pitch`) by default as it helps with legibility.  The
colours of those buttons can be changed by overriding the relevant
entries:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:4f6b6ca3-f5bb-4830-8312-baa232305360>.

[ Use my `fontaine` package to affect fonts via faces and to apply
  presets for various contexts. ]


## Changes to remaining user options


### The `modus-themes-headings` also affects the Org agenda

This user option applies to heading level 0 through 8 and also to the
agenda date and structure constructs.  Here is a complete example:

    (setq modus-themes-headings ; read the manual's entry of the doc string
          '((0 . (variable-pitch light 1.9))
            (1 . (variable-pitch light 1.8))
            (2 . (variable-pitch regular 1.7))
            (3 . (variable-pitch regular 1.6))
            (4 . (variable-pitch regular 1.5))
            (5 . (variable-pitch 1.4)) ; absence of weight means `bold'
            (6 . (variable-pitch 1.3))
            (7 . (variable-pitch 1.2))
            (agenda-date . (semilight 1.5))
            (agenda-structure . (variable-pitch light 1.9))
            (t . (variable-pitch 1.1))))


### The `modus-themes-headings` no longer affects colours

All colour-related changes can be done via palette overrides.  This
gives the user maximum flexibility on the choice of applied colours
(e.g. to have alternating contrasting foregrounds or shades of the
same hue).  The manual shows several examples:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:11297984-85ea-4678-abe9-a73aeab4676a>.


### The `modus-themes-completions` is simpler

It no longer covers `popup` entries as distinct from `selection`.
This is because I revised all the applicable colours and faces to
consolidate styles.

The `matches` and `selection` keys now read the same list of values.

All changes to colours are done through palette overrides, as
demonstrated in the manual (again, far more flexible):
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:d959f789-0517-4636-8780-18123f936f91>.


### The `modus-themes-prompts` is simpler

This user option now only affects the typographic features of prompts.
It can read any font weight, as explained in its documentation.
Colours are influenced by semantic colour mappings in the palette and
can be overridden accordingly.  The manual shows several styles:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:bd75b43a-0bf1-45e7-b8b4-20944ca8b7f8>.


### Auto-reload theme when configuring via Custom

The user option `modus-themes-custom-auto-reload` supersedes the old
`modus-themes-inhibit-reload`.  It is now set to a non-`nil` value by
default.

We do this as a convenience for users who tweak theme settings via the
Custom UI and who do not know that all modifications to user options
require a theme re-load for changes to take effect.  Read more in the
manual:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:9001527a-4e2c-43e0-98e8-3ef72d770639>.


## Deprecation of public functions

The `modus-themes-color` and `modus-themes-color-alts` are deprecated.
Users are invited to concentrate on the `modus-themes-with-colors`
macro.  The manual provides several examples on that front.

The `modus-themes-load-themes` is no longer necessary due to the
refactoring of the code base.

The `modus-themes-load-operandi` and `modus-themes-load-vivendi` are
superseded by the general `modus-themes-load-theme`.  It accepts the
symbol of a Modus theme as its argument.

The command `modus-themes-report-bug` is no more.  Just send an email
to the mailing list or to me privately.  Find the information with
`M-x describe-package` and then specify `modus-themes`.
Alternatively, check my website: <https://protesilaos.com/contact>.


## Removed support for some packages

These are the most notable packages that are no longer supported:

-   `dired+`
-   `lsp-mode`
-   `helm`
-   `treemacs`

The reason is that they are very hard to use for me as an outsider.
They provide lots of features, which means that I cannot easily
identify faces in their context unless I become an expert in the
relevant functionality.

Other removed packages:

-   `artbollocks-mode`.  Use `writegood-mode`.
-   `apropos`.  Its default faces are fine.
-   `awesome-tray`.
-   `bbdb` and `ebdb`.  They are hard to set up, but their faces are
    usable.
-   `calfw`.  Hard to set up and also seems to no longer be maintained.
-   `easy-jekyll`
-   `dir-treeview`
-   `eros`
-   `eshell-git-prompt`
-   `eshell-prompt-extras`
-   `eshell-syntax-highlighting`
-   `evil-goggles`
-   `evil-snipe`
-   `evil-visual-mark-mode`
-   `fountain-mode`.  I need someone who uses it to help me test it.
-   `macrostep`
-   `mentor`
-   `mini-modeline`
-   `mmm-mode`.  I need someone who uses it to help me test it.
-   `org-table-sticky-header`.
-   `phi-grep`
-   `pomidor`
-   `rainbow-blocks`.  Use Adam Porter's (aka alphapapa) `prism.el`.
-   `semantic`
-   `smartparens`
-   `spaceline`
-   `sx`
-   `telephone-line`
-   `tomatinho`
-   `winum`
-   `xterm-color`.


## Thanks for their feedback on the development of version 4

In alphabetical order:

-   **Aleksei Pirogov:** Noticed that there were no semantic colour
    mappings for the `rainbow-delimiters` (and related), thus reminding
    me to make the requisite arrangements.  Aleksei also spotted a
    regression during the development of the "faint" overrides' preset.
    These were done on the GitHub mirror:
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/54>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/55>

-   **Anders Johansson:** Pointed out some irregularities with the use of
    `make-obsolete` in the `version-4` development branch.  I should be
    using `make-obsolete-variable` in some cases:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3CCAKJdtO-dzvR%3D2BaSd5qPzwDE%3D%2BaJSR6js7ii1O6KD7oFOB7gDw%40mail.gmail.com%3E>

-   **Charlotte Van Petegem:** Reminded me to document how to reproduce
    the old "alt-syntax" style by using palette overrides:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C877cy917jw.fsf%40vanpetegem.me%3E>

-   **Christian Tietze:** Spotted a bug in how shared palette overrides
    would not be read in certain scenaria.  Also suggested tweaks to the
    documentation, which reminded me of tasks that still had to be done:
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm1cz81rq9m.fsf%40christiantietze.de%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm1fscxrr0s.fsf%40christiantietze.de%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm1ilhtrs09.fsf%40christiantietze.de%3E>

-   **Daniel Mendler (aka @minad on GitHub):** Contacted me to comment on
    the general redesign.  From the discussion I learnt that preset
    overrides would be useful.  This information is shared with
    permission, as it was done via a private channel.

-   **James Ferguson:** Commented on the colours of the tab-bar and thus
    inspired me to define relevant semantic colour mappings:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3CCAMtGdSnrKDGdagT7vGC9DnBZnOvkbM%3D4Nxwn3ts2tdO8YmUnxw%40mail.gmail.com%3E>

-   **Philip Kaludercic:** Opined that the `modus-themes-inhibit-reload`
    should not be deprecated in the interest of usability.  As noted
    above, its functionality is preserved and now enabled by default in
    `modus-themes-custom-auto-reload`.  Through the discussion we also
    arrived at the concept of shared palette overrides instead of only
    having theme-specific ones:
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C87h6y3gyxx.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C87wn6qgjkx.fsf%40posteo.net%3E>

-   **Tony Zorman:** Noted that there was no clear upgrade path to
    version 4.  This helped me explain some of the technicalities of
    packaging and of the themes' redesign, but also to update the
    manual:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3C874jtew0gp.fsf%40hyperspace%3E>.

-   **a1ks:** Reported a bug caused by the typo of an extra backtick.
    This was done on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/53>.

-   **soaringbind:** Identified some omissions in the code where I forgot
    to update certain Avy and Org faces.  This continued in a second
    thread about the use of some obsolete faces:
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3CNKXY2k1--3-9%40tuta.io%3E>
    -   <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3CNKd3jM_--3-9%40tuta.io%3E>

-   **tumashu:** Experimented with the overrides and thus helped me
    identify an area where the documentation could be improved.  This
    was done on the GitHub mirror:
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/56>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/57>

-   **wakamenod:** Encountered a bug that was caused by a mistake of mine
    that affected how themes are instantiated.  This was done on the
    GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/50>.


## The largest release to date

There are many more changes that I did not describe.  This already
lengthy document is me covering just the headline features.  The gist
is that I spent the last month refactoring and testing the themes to
ensure they can cope with the needs of users for years to come.

I understand that the palette overrides are a new way of doing things
and that some users may be inconvenienced over the short-term as they
update their configurations.  I strongly believe that this system is
better and the Modus themes can now cover all the legibility needs of
users, while also catering to their aesthetic preferences.

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `modus-themes`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>
-   Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-changelog>
-   Colour palette: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-colors>
-   Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>
-   Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
    -   Mirrors:
        -   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
        -   GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
-   Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
-   Backronym: My Old Display Unexpectedly Sharpened &#x2026; themes
