---
title: 'Emacs: modus-themes version 4.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published the latest stable release of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The change log
entry is reproduced further below.  It is a long read.  For any
questions, feel welcome to [contact me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will soon install the changes in emacs.git so please wait a little
longer for the updates to trickle down to you.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `modus-themes` (also built into Emacs 28+)
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-changelog>
+ Colour palette: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-colors>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Backronym: My Old Display Unexpectedly Sharpened ... themes

* * *

## I won a Google award for the Modus themes

Report here: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-05-25-emacs-google-award/>.

This is not a "change" per se, but it is worth documenting here.  It
shows how important accessibility can be in empowering people to use
their computer and, in our case, to exercise their software freedoms.

The Modus themes tend to one aspect of accessibility.  They do not
exhaust the topic, though they should at least raise awareness about
the significance of tending to the usability needs of everyone.  The
effort I put into documenting the themes (and my other packages)
should be understood in this light as a means of helping people enjoy
their software freedom by learning how to use and extend the program
in question.


## New tritanopia-optimised themes

I have created a pair of light and dark themes that are intended for
people with blue-yellow colour deficiency (tritanopia).  These are
`modus-operandi-tritanopia` (light) and `modus-vivendi-tritanopia`
(dark).  Screenshots of all the Modus themes are available on my
website: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>.

The entire collection is now described in the manual as follows:

> The Modus themes consist of eight themes, divided into four subgroups.
>
> -   **Main themes:** `modus-operandi` is the project's main light theme,
>     while `modus-vivendi` is its dark counterpart.  These two themes are
>     part of the project since its inception.  They are designed to cover
>     a broad range of needs and are, in the opinion of the author, the
>     reference for what a highly legible "default" theme should look
>     like.
>
> -   **Tinted themes:** `modus-operandi-tinted` and `modus-vivendi-tinted`
>     are variants of the two main themes.  They slightly tone down the
>     intensity of the background and provide a bit more color variety.
>     `modus-operandi-tinted` has a set of base tones that are shades of
>     light ochre (earthly colors), while `modus-vivendi-tinted` gives a
>     night sky impression.
>
> -   **Deuteranopia themes:** `modus-operandi-deuteranopia` and its
>     companion `modus-vivendi-deuteranopia` are optimized for users with
>     red-green color deficiency.  This means that they do not use red and
>     green hues for color-coding purposes, such as for diff removed and
>     added lines.  Instead, they implement colors that are discernible by
>     users with deueteranopia or deuteranomaly (mostly yellow and blue
>     hues).
>
> -   **Tritanopia themes:** `modus-operandi-tritanopia` and its counterpart
>     `modus-vivendi-tritanopia` are optimized for users with blue-yellow
>     color deficiency.  The idea is the same as with the deuteranopia
>     variants: color coding relies only on hues that are accessible to
>     people with tritanopia or tritanomaly, namely, shades of red and
>     cyan.


## Recalibrated the "graph" colours in all themes

The new palette subset improves the contrast of all the relevant
colours when presented side-by-side.  These are most notably used by
the `org-habit` consistency graph, which is displayed in the Org
agenda.  The deuteranopia and tritanopia themes have their own bespoke
colours for this purpose, due to their specific requirements for
colour coding (e.g. they cannot use green).


## Faces or face groups

-   Introduced a subtle 3D effect for clickable buttons, replacing the
    previous 2D design.  I realised the flat style creates ambiguity
    between the button and the text fields.  This happens, for example,
    with `M-x customize-variable` for `org-capture-templates` which has
    lots of button and text field combinations.  The added sense of
    depth helps with the usability of these buttons because it makes
    them unambiguous.  Personally, I prefer the 2D approach, but here we
    have a trade-off between usability and aesthetics.  According to
    what I state in the manual:

    > If there arises an inescapable trade-off between usability and
    > stylistic considerations, we will always opt for the former.

-   Refashioned the `whitespace-mode` to be much more subtle and added
    the concomitant semantic colour mappings.

    The previous style involved the use of a dim grey background for
    each invisible character.  While this is was good to spot invisible
    characters quickly, it was a major hindrance for users who want to
    run `whitespace-mode` at all times (e.g. for the Python programming
    language which is space-sensitive).

    We thus remove the backgrounds by default but provide the option to
    reinstate them via palette overrides (as documented at length in the
    manual).  To this end, we have two new semantic colour mappings for
    ordinary space, its invisible characters, as well as space errors.

    Thanks to Christian Tietze and Oliver Epper for their feedback in
    issue 80 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/80>.

-   Applied a more subtle background for faces `menu-bar-mode`,
    `tool-bar-mode`, `scroll-bar-mode`.  They do not need to stand out
    so much because the toolkit already takes care of that.  Also, we do
    not want to dillute the semantic value of either `bg-tab-bar` or
    `fringe` palette colour mappings that I was wrongly using before in
    this context.  Note that those faces may not apply, depending on the
    underlying tool kit.  For example, I encounter them with the Lucid
    build of Emacs, though not with the GTK one.

-   Fix the critical typo of 'widget-buton', which prevented the actual
    `widget-button` face from being affected by the themes.  Thanks to
    Steve Downey for pointing it out in issue 73 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/73>.

-   Added support for the `disk-usage` package.  It is made to look like
    Dired, to the extent possible.  Thanks to Nacho Barrientos for the
    patch: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/patches/39822>.
    The change is small and does not require copyright assignment to the
    Free Software Foundation.

-   Made the `eglot-diagnostic-tag-unnecessary-face` look like a
    warning.  By default it inherits the `shadow` face, which makes it
    counter-intuitive as it dims the text instead of bringing it to our
    attention.  The intent of `eglot-diagnostic-tag-unnecessary-face` is
    to highlight unused symbols, so this is better presented as a
    warning.

    Thanks to Augusto Stoffel for bringing this matter to my attention.
    This was done via a private channel and the information is shared
    with permission.

-   Changed the `smerge-markers` to inherit from `diff-header` instead
    of `diff-heading`.  Thanks to Steve Downey for the contribution.
    This was done in pull request 74 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/pull/74>.  The change
    is small and does not require copyright assignment to the Free
    Software Foundation.

-   Added support for the `jinx` package.  This was originally done by
    Tomasz Hołubowicz in pull request 71 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/pull/71>.  The change
    is small and does not require copyright assignment to the Free
    Software Foundation.  I then modified it to make the underlines look
    like warnings instead of errors.  This is because of how the package
    works: it automatically highlights misspellings in the visible
    portion of the buffer.  There are cases where this results in a very
    intense presentation, which can be distracting.  We want to reduce
    the overall intensity and not draw too much attention to those
    highlights.

-   Extended coverage of Org to the new `org-agenda-calendar-daterange`
    face (part of Org version 9.7).  Thanks to Gautier Ponsinet for the
    patch, which I received via a private channel.  The change is small
    and does not require copyright assignment to the Free Software
    Foundation.  In addition to this, I introduced a new semantic colour
    mapping in the themes' palette called `date-range`.  This can be
    used with the palette overrides, which are documented at length in
    the manual (there are lots of copy-pastable examples as well).

-   Supported all of the new faces of the built-in `proced` package.
    These are part of Emacs 29 and make the `proced` buffers more
    colourful, subject to the user option `proced-enable-color-flag`.
    As always, the themes strive to avoid exaggerations, meaning that I
    apply colour with restraint: not all faces need to stand out.

-   Included the `rst-mode` in the list of explicitly supported
    packages, making its heading look like those of Org, Markdown, etc.
    Thanks to David Edmondson for the patch:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/patches/40625>.  I
    believe David has already assigned copyright to the Free Software
    Foundation, though this patch is small anyway.

-   Covered all the new faces of the built-in `flymake` package.  These
    concern the inline feedback messages (Emacs 30) as well as those
    that appear in the echo area (Emacs 29).  The former are subject to
    the user option `flymake-show-diagnostics-at-end-of-line`.

-   Reduced the intensity of the `which-key` prefix descriptions.  Those
    are the keymaps that displayed by `which-key` to hint that typing
    the given key will open a new `which-key` page with more keys.

-   Configured new `vundo-saved` and `vundo-last-saved` faces of the
    `vundo` package.  They are designed to be easy to read, without
    going over-the-top.  Thanks to Nicolas Semrau for bringing this
    matter to my attention in issue 79 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/79>.

-   Removed the deprecated `consult-preview-cursor` face and made the
    requisite adjustments to the `consult` faces.  This was done in
    commit `267b0c9` of the Consult Git repository.  Discussed here:
    <https://github.com/minad/consult/issues/764#issuecomment-1537491625>.

-   Instructed the `shr-selected-link` face of the built-in `shr`
    package to use a "mark selection" style instead of the semantically
    incorrect "intense red" it had before.  This change is helpful for
    those who override the palette of their Modus theme of choice, while
    it also allows us to have varied colours depending on the
    requirements of each theme (e.g. deuteranopia/tritanopia compared to
    the defaults).

-   Did the same as above, mutatis mutandis, for the faces
    `transient-disabled-suffix`, `web-mode-error-face`,
    `erc-dangerous-host-face`, `aw-minibuffer-leading-char-face`,
    `binder-sidebar-highlight`, `binder-sidebar-missing`,
    `image-dired-thumb-flagged`, `image-dired-thumb-mark`,
    `info-menu-star`, `rainbow-delimiters-mismatched-face`,
    `evil-ex-substitute-matches`, `iedit-occurrence`,
    `iedit-read-only-occurrence`, `pgtk-im-0`, `dired-narrow-blink`.

-   Enhanced the `image-dired` mark faces with a box border, as the use
    of a background alone can be obscured by the underlying image
    thumbnail, depending on its figures/colours.

-   Removed the backgrounds from the `powerline-evil` faces and
    simplified their overral presentation in the interest of
    maintainability.  The old styles were hard to predict and test.
    There could easily be conflicts, such as if the user would override
    the colours of the mode line.

-   Ensured that `diary` and `holiday` colours are distinct and legible,
    without being too intense.


## Changes to the manual or other documentation

-   Updated the doc string of the primary customisation group defined by
    the themes to reflect the support for the case of tritanopia.

-   Included links to the web page of the manual and the one with the
    sample pictures in the customisation groups.  Those links appear in
    the various Custom UI buffers.

-   Introduced an annotation function for all commands that involve
    minibuffer completion.  The annotations display the one-line
    description of each theme, making it easier for a user to pick their
    preferred choice (e.g. when using the `modus-themes-select`
    command).

-   Defined semantic colour mappings for "marks".  These are used by
    `dired`, `trashed`, `proced`, and others.  These is no change to the
    default appearance of what users are already familiar with, though
    it is now possible to override those styles.

-   Complemented the subset of semantic colour mappings for
    errors/warnings with "prominent" variants.  Those employ a
    background and foreground combination.  They are used in all sorts
    of contexts, such as for fringe errors (`flymake`, `flycheck`, &#x2026;),
    `query-replace`, `isearch-fail`, and others.

-   Wrote sample code on how to add "padding" to the Emacs frame and the
    space between the Emacs windows.  This makes for a presentation that
    some users find easier to work with.

-   Corrected the sample code for `git-gutter` to use the appropriate
    symbols from the theme palette.  Thanks to Christian Tietze for the
    patch: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/patches/40354>.
    The change is small and does not require copyright assignment to the
    Free Software Foundation.

-   Removed `moody` from the list of packages explicitly supported by
    the themes.  We stopped supporting it since version 4 that removed
    the relevant user option for the mode line.  The idea is that the
    mode line is better handled by the user without interference from
    the theme, due to the number of options available (and how brittle
    those can be when interacting with unpredictable face definitions).
    Thanks to Nicolas De Jaeghere for reminding me to remove `moody`
    from the manual:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cypi9jzyclqxy.fsf%40gmail.com%3E#%3C87jzybdgg1.fsf@dejaeghe.re%3E>.


## Miscellaneous

-   Added two new preset palette overrides to make the overall
    presentation "warmer" or "cooler".  Those are called
    `modus-themes-preset-overrides-warmer` and
    `modus-themes-preset-overrides-cooler`, respectively.  The manual
    explains how those presets can be used.  I suggest the user does
    not add such overrides if they intend to load any of the
    deuteranopia or tritanopia themes, due to the specific
    requirements of their design.

-   Refined the deuteranopia yellows for warnings, errors, and comments.
    These otherwise slight adjustments make it considerably easier to
    tell apart distinct elements that may be positioned close together.

-   Tweaked the deuteranopia semantic colour mappings for emails.  The
    subject line use a more appropriate colour value, while level 3
    quotes stand out a bit more than they did before, without being
    needlessly intense.

-   Arranged for the `modus-themes-load-theme` function return the
    value of the `THEME` argument it accepts.  The intent is to allow
    other functions that call this one to capture the return value for
    their purposes (such as with a `let` binding).  Thank to Oliver
    Epper for the feedback in issue 78 on the GitHub mirror:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/78>.
