---
title: 'Emacs: Lin version 1.1.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my lin package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Lin is a stylistic enhancement for Emacs' built-in `hl-line-mode`.  It
remaps the `hl-line` face (or equivalent) buffer-locally to a style that
is optimal for major modes where line selection is the primary mode of
interaction.

The idea is that `hl-line-mode` cannot work equally well for contexts
with competing priorities: (i) line selection, or (ii) simple line
highlight.  In the former case, the current line needs to be made
prominent because it carries a specific meaning of some significance in
the given context: the user has to select a line.  Whereas in the latter
case, the primary mode of interaction does not revolve around the line
highlight itself: it may be because the focus is on editing text or
reading through the buffer's contents, so the current line highlight is
more of a reminder of the point's location on the vertical axis.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `lin`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/lin>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/lin>
+ Backronym: LIN Is Noticeable.

Below are the release notes

* * *

The package is in a stable state. These are some quality-of-life
refinements.

-   Updated the colour values of all the faces defined by `lin`. They
    now are a bit more vivid. The colours come from my `modus-themes`.

-   Defined the user option `lin-remap-current-line-number`, which is
    set to a non-nil value by default. What it does is to apply the
    colour of the currently highlighted line (per `hl-line-mode`) to the
    line number when `display-line-numbers-mode` is enabled.

-   Used the correct symbol for the Mu4e headers hook
    (`mu4e-headers-mode-hook` instead of `mu4e-headers-mode`). Thanks to
    Simon Pugnet for the contribution. The change is small, meaning that
    Simon does not need to assign copyright to the Free Software
    Foundation.

-   Added the `archive-mode-hook` and `tar-mode-hook` to the
    `lin-mode-hooks`. Thanks to Nicolas De Jaeghere for the
    contribution. It too does not require copyright assignment.
