---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.5.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` is a collection of light and dark themes for GNU Emacs
whose goal is to provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for
users who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes`
(also designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repo on SourceHut: <https://git.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
  - Mirrors:
    + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
    + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## The new `ef-arbutus` and `ef-rosa` themes

The `ef-arbutus` theme combines red and green colours against a mild
light red-pink background. The announcement article contains
screenshots: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2023-12-29-ef-arbutus/>.

The `ef-rosa` theme has a deep dark red-brown background with a blend
of magenta and green foregrounds. Check the blog post for pictures:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-01-06-emacs-ef-rosa/>.

These two new entries bring the total count of the collection to 30.

Remember that you can set the user option `ef-themes-to-toggle` to two
themes in the collection and switch between them with the command
`ef-themes-toggle`. For example:

```elisp
(setq ef-themes-to-toggle '(ef-arbutus ef-rosa))
```

Otherwise, use the command `ef-themes-load-random` (call it with a
`C-u` prefix argument to limit the result to either dark or light
themes, else call it from Lisp, like `(ef-themes-load-random 'dark)`).


## Stopped the `transient` buffers from trying semantic key colouration

In a recent version of `transient.el`, there is a new user option that
applies colour-coding to keys (e.g. we see those while using `magit`):
`transient-semantic-coloring`. This option is enabled by default,
changing the previous style that was used as a reference for all my
designs.

The idea with such colour coding is to indicate when a key continues
to display the transient, exits with a given action, and the like. For
our purposes this interface cannot work:

-   We need some place to teach users what each colour means, as there
    are no indicators of any sort to help them (whereas, say, in diff
    buffers we have the plus and minus signs).

-   Not all hues are suitable for highlighting a single character. In
    light themes, for example, green and yellow colours are TERRIBLE
    choices for the requirements of this interface where the key must be
    clearly visible. But when we introduce multiple colours, each with
    their own meaning, we will not be able to avoid those hues.

-   The style of key bindings is not limited to `transient.el`. We find
    them when we invoke `M-x`, do `M-x describe-bindings`, while using
    the `which-key` package, and many more. If we are to change how
    `transient.el` shows key bindings, then we have to retain the same
    visual cues for other contexts. Otherwise, everything is inconsistent.

-   All themes must use the same colours to preserve the colour coding,
    thus removing an important aspect of their presentation.

-   This whole paradigm does not work for themes that are optimised for
    users with colour deficiency, due to the reduced number of suitable
    hues. With deuteranopia, for example, we can only rely on yellow and
    blue: since yellow is not optimal for single key highlights against
    a light backdrop, blue is the only hue that works in such a context.

The `ef-themes` will not support this user option. All relevant faces
use the style of standard key bindings.

Themes can enforce user option values, but I have decided to change
the faces instead to better communicate my intent. If a user wants
semantic colouring, they can change the faces to whatever they like.


## The `evil` prompts now show the correct colours

While using `evil-mode`, the ex prompts no longer use their generic
hardcoded red value. They take an appropriate colour from the active
Ef theme.


## The `imenu-list` package is now supported

This package uses the built-in `imenu` infrastructure to produce a
sidebar with points of interest in the buffer. Those headings now use
the correct colour values.

Thanks to newhallroad for bringing this matter to my attention in
issue 35 on the GitHub mirror: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/35>.


## The `nerd-icons-completion` package is covered

This package defines a single face for directories/folders. It looks
like all the other `nerd-icons` packages that use that icon, such as
`nerd-icons-dired`.

Thanks to Ryan Kaskel for the contribution:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/ef-themes/patches/47379>. The change
is small. Ryan does not need to assign copyright to the Free Software
Foundation.


## Completed the coverage of the `denote` faces

The new style ensures better thematic consistency.

These faces are found in Dired buffers when `denote-dired-mode` is
enabled. Same for the default style of the backlinks buffer.


## Changed highlights to avoid conflating "flagged" and "trashed" emails

This is for email clients such as `mu4e` and `notmuch`. Flagged ad
trashed emails used to have the same colour, which was a problem when
the user would try to filter in such a way as to show both at the same
time.

Thanks to Adam Porter (GitHub user alphapapa) for bringing this matter
to my attention in issue 32 on the GitHub mirror:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/32>.


## Support for more specialised faces

-   **`blink-matching-paren-offscreen`:** Defined in the built-in
    `simple.el` to highlight the matching parenthesis in the echo area
    when it is off screen (Emacs 30).

-   **`mct-highlight-candidate`:** Part of the `mct` package to highlight
    the currently selected completion candidate in the `*Completions*`
    buffer.

-   **`shr-mark`:** Used by the built-in `shr` library (Simple HTML
    Renderer) to highlight `<mark>` tags (Emacs 29).


## Expanded the semantic colour mappings

Each theme defines colours and then maps them to semantic constructs.
The idea is to not hardcode colour values, but to have an indirection
that enforces consistency, while keeping things flexible/customisable.
Users can override palette entries as explained in the manual:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes#h:4b923795-4b23-4345-81e5-d1c108a84b6a>.

New semantic colour mappings are:

-   **`bg-search-current`:** Background colour of the currently matched
    term of search interfaces, like `isearch`.

-   **`bg-search-lazy`:** This background is used in the same contexts as
    the above, but for matches other than the current one.

-   **`bg-search-replace`:** Background of the currently targeted
    replacement in `query-replace` operations or related.

-   **`bg-search-rx-group-{0..3}`,:** Backgrounds for regular expression
    groups, such as while using `M-x re-builder`.

-   **`bg-fringe` and `fg-fringe`:** Applies to the background of the
    fringe area in Emacs frames. By default, the Ef themes do not use a
    distinct background there, so this is for those who need it.

-   **`prose-table-formula`:** Used for formula entries in plain text
    tables, such as with Org, to distinguish them from the other
    contents of the table.


## Miscellaneous

-   Used the updated `modus-themes` formula for the contrast tables of
    all the Ef themes (stored in the file `contrast-ratios.org` in the
    project's root directory).

    I made this change in commit `b410fcc` in the `modus-themes` repo.
    The idea is to avoid the use of the `cl-loop` and other `cl-`
    functions that we don't really need (and which also have their own
    mini language that I find hard to remember/use).

-   Tweaked the value of a few accented backgrounds to better fit with
    each theme's style. These colours may not be spotted anywhere right
    now, but are nonetheless available to those who use palette
    overrides (run the command `ef-themes-preview-colors` or
    `ef-themes-preview-colors-current` to visualise them).
