---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 3.1.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *


## Version 3.1.0 on 2024-09-04

Denote is stable and reliable though we keep adding minor refinements
to it. Remember that many&#x2014;if not all&#x2014;of these are intended for
experienced users who have developed their own workflow and want to
adapt Denote to its particularities. We may call them &ldquo;power users&rdquo;.

New users do not need to know about every single feature. A basic
configuration is enough and is why the original video I did about
Denote (from even before I published version `0.1.0`) is still relevant.
For example:

```elisp
;; Start with something like this.
(use-package denote
  :ensure t
  :bind
  (("C-c n n" . denote)
   ("C-c n r" . denote-rename-file)
   ("C-c n i" . denote-link) ; "insert" mnemonic
   ("C-c n b" . denote-backlinks))
  :config
  (setq denote-directory (expand-file-name "~/Documents/notes/")))
```

And here is the same idea with a little bit more convenience:

```elisp
;; Another basic setup with a little more to it.
(use-package denote
  :ensure t
  :hook (dired-mode . denote-dired-mode)
  :bind
  (("C-c n n" . denote)
   ("C-c n r" . denote-rename-file)
   ("C-c n l" . denote-link)
   ("C-c n b" . denote-backlinks))
  :config
  (setq denote-directory (expand-file-name "~/Documents/notes/"))

  ;; Automatically rename Denote buffers when opening them so that
  ;; instead of their long file name they have a literal "[D]"
  ;; followed by the file's title.  Read the doc string of
  ;; `denote-rename-buffer-format' for how to modify this.
  (denote-rename-buffer-mode 1))
```

### The `denote-sort-dired` command is more configurable

The `denote-sort-dired` command asks for a literal string or regular
expression and then produces a fully fledged Dired listing of matching
files in the `denote-directory`. Combined with the efficient Denote
file-naming scheme, this is a killer feature to collect your relevant
files in a consolidated view and have the full power of Dired available.

By default `denote-sort-dired` prompts for the file name component to
sort by and then asks whether to reverse the sorting or not. Users who
want a more streamlined experience can configure the user option
`denote-sort-dired-extra-prompts`.

It is possible to skip the prompts altogether and use the default
values for (i) which component to sort by and (ii) whether to reverse
the sort. To this end, users can have something like this in their
configuration:

```elisp
;; Do not issue any extra prompts.  Always sort by the `title' file
;; name component and never do a reverse sort.
(setq denote-sort-dired-extra-prompts nil)
(setq denote-sort-dired-default-sort-component 'title)
(setq denote-sort-dired-default-reverse-sort nil)
```

For me, Dired is one of the best things about Emacs and I like how it
combines so nicely with Denote file names (this is the cornerstone of
Denote, after all).


### The `denote-sort-dired` sorting functions are customisable

Power users may want to control how the sorting works and what it is
matching on a per file-name-component basis. The user options are
these:

-   `denote-sort-title-comparison-function`.
-   `denote-sort-keywords-comparison-function`.
-   `denote-sort-signature-comparison-function`.

One use-case is to match specific patterns inside of file names, such
as Luhmann-style signatures. I wrote about this in the manual as well
as on my blog (with screenshots):
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-08-01-emacs-denote-luhmann-signature-sort/>.

Thanks to Riccardo Giannitrapani for discussing this with me and
helping me understand the use-case better. This was done via a private
channel and I am sharing it with permission.


### Show the date of each linked file in Org dynamic blocks

All our Org dynamic blocks that produce links to files now read the
parameter `:include-date`. When it is set to `t`, the listed files
will include their corresponding date inside of parentheses after the
file&rsquo;s title.

Thanks to Sergio Rey for describing this idea to me. This was done via
a private channel and the information is shared with permission.


### Exclude specific directories from Org dynamic blocks

The optional Org dynamic blocks we define let users collect links to
other files (and more) in a quick and effective way. Each block
accepts parameters which control its output, such as how to sort
files.

All our dynamic blocks now accept the `:excluded-dirs-regexp`. This is
a regular expression which is matched against directory file system
paths. Matching directories and their files are not included in the
data handled by the dynamic block.

Note that we have the user option `denote-excluded-punctuation-regexp`
which defines a global preference along the same lines.

I did a video about this feature:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-07-30-emacs-denote-exclude-dirs-org-blocks/>.

Thanks to Claudio Migliorelli for discussing this idea with me. It was
done via a private channel and this information is shared with permission.


### New dynamic block to insert files as headings

We already had an Org dynamic block that would insert file contents.
Though that one inserts files as they are, optionally without their
front matter. However, users may have a workflow where they want to
eventually copy some of the block&rsquo;s output into the main file they are
editing, at which point it is easier for the entire inserted file to
appear as a series of headings. The `#+title` of the inserted file
becomes a top-level heading and every other heading is pushed deeper
one level.

To this end, we provide the Org dynamic block known as `denote-files-as-headings`.
Insert it with the command `denote-org-extras-dblock-insert-files-as-headings`
or select it with the minibuffer after calling Org&rsquo;s own command
`org-dynamic-block-insert-dblock`.

The top-level headings (those that were the `#+title`) can optionally
link back to the original file. Though please read the manual for all
the parameters this dynamic block takes.


### The dynamic block for backlinks can be about the current heading only

The Org dynamic block for backlinks can now read the optional
`:this-heading-only` parameter. When it is set to `t`, the block will
only include links that point to the specific heading inside of the
current file. Otherwise, backlinks are about the whole file.

To insert such a dynamic block, use the command
`denote-org-extras-dblock-insert-backlinks`.


### Toggle the detailed view in backlinks buffers

By default, the buffer produced by the command `denote-backlinks` has
a compact view of showing the file names linking to the current file.
With the user option `denote-backlinks-show-context` set to a non-nil
value, the backlinks buffer produces a detailed listing of matching
results, where the links are shown in their original context.

Users can now choose to have this on-demand by calling the command
`denote-backlinks-toggle-context` which switches between the detailed
and compact views.

This blog post I wrote about it include screenshots:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-07-25-emacs-denote-backlinks-context-toggle/>.


### Templates can have a function that returns a string

The `denote-templates` variable allows the user to specify one or more
named templates which can then be inserted during the creation of a
new note. One way to be prompted for a template among those specified
is to modify the `denote-prompts` user option and then use the regular
`denote` command. Another way is to use the command `denote-template`
(alias `denote-create-note-with-template`), which will prompt for the
template to use.

Templates ordinarily have a string as their value, though now their
value can also be the symbol of a function. This function takes no
arguments and is expected to return a string. Denote takes care to
insert that below the front matter of the new note.

So it can look like this:

```elisp
(setq denote-templates
      `((report . "* Some heading\n\n* Another heading") ; A string with newline characters
        (blog . my-denote-template-function-for-blog) ; the symbol of a function that will return a string
        (memo . ,(concat "* Some heading" ; expand this `concat' into a string
                         "\n\n"
                         "* Another heading"
                         "\n\n"))))
```

Thanks to skissue (Ad) for the contribution in pull request 398:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/398>. The change is small,
meaning that its author does not need to assign copyright to the Free
Software Foundation.

Also thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for extending this to
`denote-org-capture`. Done in pull request 399:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/399>. Jean-Philippe is a
long-time contributor who has assigned copyright to the Free Software
Foundation.


### The `denote-rename-buffer-mode` can now show if a file has backlinks

This global minor mode takes care to rename the buffers of Denote
files to a pattern that is easier for users to read. As with
everything, it is highly configurable. The default value now includes
an indicator that shows if the current file has backlinks (other files
linking to it).

The exact characters used in this indicator are specified in the new
user option `denote-rename-buffer-backlinks-indicator`. The default
value is `"<-->"`, which hopefully communicates the idea of a link
(but, yeah, symbolism is hard). Users may want to modify this to add
some fancier Unicode character.

Thanks to Ashton Wiersdorf for the original contribution in pull
request 392: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/392>. Ashton
has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


### The `denote-rename-buffer-format` has changed

In the same theme as above, the user option `denote-rename-buffer-format`
has a new default value. Before, it would only show the title of the
file. Now it shows the aforementioned `denote-rename-buffer-backlinks-indicator`,
if there are backlinks, plus the title, plus a literal `"[D]"` prefix.
The prefix should make it easier to spot Denote files in a buffer
listing.

Read the documentation of `denote-rename-buffer-format` for how to
tweak this to your liking.


### New user option `denote-kill-buffers`

This controls whether and when Denote should automatically kill any
buffer it generates while creating a new note or renaming an existing
file. The manual describes the details.

By default, Denote does not kill any buffers to give users the chance
to review what is on display and confirm any changes or revert them
accordingly.

Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the contribution in pull
request 426: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/426>. This is
related to issues 273 and 413, so also thanks to Vineet C. Kulkarni
and mentalisttraceur for their participation and/or questions.


### The `denote-journal-extras-new-or-existing-entry` handles any filename component order

Version `3.0.0` of Denote introduced a new option to rearrange the
file name components. All Denote commands should respect it. We did,
however, have a problem with the command `denote-journal-extras-new-or-existing-entry`
which was not recognising the date properly.

Thanks to Jakub Szczerbowski for the contribution in pull request 395:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/395>. The change is small,
meaning that Jakub does not need to assign copyright to the Free
Software Foundation.

While I am documenting this here, users should already have the fix as
I published a minor release for it in July (in fact, there were 8
minor releases in the aftermath of the `3.0.0` release, which
addressed several small issues).


### The `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter` recognises the file-at-point in Dired

This makes it consistent with how `denote-rename-file` works. I am
implemented this in response to issue 401 where Alp Eren Kose assumed
it was the default behaviour: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/401>.

I think it makes sense to have it this way to avoid such confusion.
Still, it seems easier to edit the file and call `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter`
directly, rather do an intermediate step through Dired.


### The `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter` does not ask to rewrite front matter

The workflow for this command is that the user modifies the front
matter, invokes the command, and Denote takes care to rename the file
accordingly. We had a regression were this would happen as expected,
but Denote would still prompt if it was okay to update the front
matter. That made no sense.

As with the change mentioned above, this was also fixed in a minor
release so that users would not have to wait all this time.


### The `denote-add-links` and `denote-find-link` commands always works inside a silo

This was always the intended behaviour, though there was an issue with
the implementation that prevented the directory-local value from being
read.

Thanks to yetanotherfossman for reporting the problem with
`denote-add-links` in issue 386 and to Kolmas for doing the same for
`denote-find-link`:

-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/386>.
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/416>.

Also thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for following up with a change
to the code that should address the underlying problem with temporary
buffers. This was done in pull request 419:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/419>.


### Denote commands should work in more special Org buffers

A case we already handled was `org-capture` buffers. Another one is
the buffer produced by the command `org-tree-to-indirect-buffer`.

Thanks to coherentstate for bringing this matter to my attention in
issue 418: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/418>.

Also thanks to skissue for noting another edge case that prevented
`denote-rename-buffer-mode` from doing the right thing. This was
reported in issue 393: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/393>.


### Denote will not create a `CUSTOM_ID` via `org-capture` if not necessary

If the `org-capture` template does not include one of the specifiers
which produce a link, then we take care to not include a `CUSTOM_ID`
in the properties of the current heading. We do this to make it
possible to link directly to a heading inside of a file (a feature
that is documented in the manual).

Before, we were creating the `CUSTOM_ID` unconditionally, which was
not the desired behaviour. Thanks to Jonas Großekathöfer for bringing
this matter to my attention in issue 404:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/404>.


### The prompt for selecting a silo has the appropriate metadata

All the Denote minibuffer prompts have the appropriate completion
metadata to integrate with core Emacs functionalities and with
third-party packages that leverage them. One such case pertains to the
completion category our prompts report. This is used by a package such
as `embark` to infer the set of relevant actions to perform or by the
`marginalia` package to produce the appropriate annotations.

Users will now notice a difference while using commands such as
`denote-silo-extras-create-note` if they have `marginalia-mode`
enabled: all completion candidates will have file-related annotations.

This is a small change which goes to show how the little things
contribute to a more refined experience.


### New name for option that controls where backlinks buffers are displayed

The user option is now called `denote-backlinks-display-buffer-action`.
The old name `denote-link-backlinks-display-buffer-action` is an alias
for it and will thus work the same way. Though you are encouraged to
rename it in your configuration as I will eventually remove those
obsolete symbols from the Denote code base.


### The `revert-buffer` should do the right thing in backlinks buffers

I made several tweaks to the underlying code to ensure that reverting
a backlinks buffer will always reuse the original parameters that
generated it. Backlinks buffers are produced by the `denote-backlinks`
command, among others.


### Lots of new entries in the manual with custom code

The manual of Denote is a rich resource of knowledge for how to use
this package and how to extend it with custom code. I have written the
following entries to further help you improve your productivity:

-   A custom `denote-region` that references the source
-   Custom sluggification to remove non-ASCII characters
-   Sort signatures that include Luhmann-style sequences
-   Why are some Org links opening outside Emacs?


### More functions for developers or advanced users

The following functions are now public, meaning that they are safe to
be used in the code of other packages or incorporated in user
configurations:

-   `denote-identifier-p`.

-   `denote-get-identifier-at-point`. I am implementing this in response
    to a question by Alan Schmitt in issue 400: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/400>.

-   `denote-org-extras-outline-prompt`.

-   `denote-silo-extras-directory-prompt`.

Consult their respective doc strings for the technicalities.

Note that the Elisp convention is that private functions (intended for
use only inside the package) have a double dash (`--`) in their name.
In principle, these are undocumented and can change at any moment
without any notice. I do try to avoid such cases and even add warnings
when I make changes to them. Still, you should not use private
functions without understanding the risks involved.


### Miscellaneous

-   Wrote more unit tests for various functions.
-   Improve the doc strings of several symbols (everything in the Denote
    code base is documented).
-   Fix some typos thanks to Nicolas Semrau and bryanrinders:
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/commit/e7cfd48bd63e0815718cd9f1f0465d8c1c4f4a84>.
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/425>.
-   Commented on all sorts of issues on the GitHub repository and many
    more in private.


### New release cycle starts in mid-September

I have many ideas for how to further refine Denote. Maybe you do too.
Though we must all wait a couple of weeks in case someone reports a
bug. This way, it is easy to fix it and publish a new minor version.
Otherwise, we may have to bundle the fix with some in-development
feature that we have not fully tested yet.


### Git commits

This is just an overview of the Git commits, though remember that
there is more that goes into a project, such as the reporting of
inconsistencies, discussion of new ideas, etc.. Thanks to everybody
involved!

    ~/Git/Projects/denote $ git shortlog 3.0.0..3.1.0 --summary --numbered
       104	Protesilaos Stavrou
         7	Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
         3	Ashton Wiersdorf
         1	Ad
         1	Jakub Szczerbowski
         1	bryanrinders
