---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 2.3.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 2.3.0 on 2024-03-24

This release brings a host of user-facing refinements to an already
stable base, as well as some impressive new features. There is a lot
to cover, so take your time reading these notes.

Special thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the numerous
refinements to parts of the code base. Some of these are not directly
visible to users, but are critical regardless. In the interest of
brevity, I will not be covering the most technical parts here. I
mention Jean-Philippe&rsquo;s contributions at the outset for this reason.
Though the Git commit log is there for interested parties to study
things further.


### Check out the `denote-explore` package by Peter Prevos

This package provides several neat extensions that help you make
better sense of your knowledge base, while keeping it in good order.
The `denote-explore` package has commands to summarise the usage of
keywords, visualise connections between notes, spot infrequently used
keywords, and jump to previous historical entries.

-   Git repository: <https://github.com/pprevos/denote-explore>.
-   Documentation: <https://lucidmanager.org/productivity/denote-explore>.

Now on to Denote version `2.3.0`!


### Link to a heading inside a Denote Org file

Denote creates links to files by using their unique identifier. As Org
provides the `CUSTOM_ID` property for per-heading identifiers, we now
leverage this infrastructure to compose links that point to a file and
then to a heading therein. This only works for Org, as no other plain
text major mode has a concept of heading identifiers (and it is not
Denote&rsquo;s job to create such a feature).

I demonstrated the functionality in a video:
<https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-01-20-emacs-denote-link-org-headings/>

Technically, the `denote:` link type has the same implementation
details as Org&rsquo;s standard `file:` and has always had this potential to
jump to a section inside the given file.


#### The `denote-org-store-link-to-heading` user option

The user option `denote-org-store-link-to-heading` determines whether
`org-store-link` links to the current Org heading (such links are
merely &ldquo;stored&rdquo; and need to be inserted afterwards with the command
`org-insert-link`). Note that the `org-capture` command uses the
`org-link` internally if it has to store a link.

When its value is non-nil, `org-store-link` stores a link to the
current Org heading inside the Denote Org file. If the heading does
not have a `CUSTOM_ID`, it creates it and includes it in the heading&rsquo;s
`PROPERTIES` drawer. If a `CUSTOM_ID` exists, `org-store-link` use it
as-is.

This makes the resulting link a combination of the `denote:` link type,
pointing to the identifier of the current file, plus the value of the
heading&rsquo;s `CUSTOM_ID`, such as:

-   `[[denote:20240118T060608][Some test]]`
-   `[[denote:20240118T060608::#h:eed0fb8e-4cc7-478f-acb6-f0aa1a8bffcd][Some test::Heading text]]`

Both lead to the same Denote file, but the latter jumps to the heading
with the given `CUSTOM_ID`. Notice that the link to the heading also
has a different description, which includes the heading text.

The value of the `CUSTOM_ID` is determined by the Org user option
`org-id-method`. The sample shown above uses the default UUID
infrastructure.

If `denote-org-store-link-to-heading` is set to a nil value, the
command `org-store-link` only stores links to the Denote file (using
its identifier), but not to the given heading. This is what Denote was
doing in all versions prior to `2.3.0`.

Thanks to Kristoffer Balintona for discussing with me how
`org-capture` interfaces with `org-store-link`. I updated the
documentation accordingly. This was done in issue 267:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/267>.


#### Insert link to an Org file with a further pointer to a heading

As part of the optional `denote-org-extras.el` extension that comes
with the `denote` package, the command `denote-org-extras-link-to-heading`
prompts for a link to an Org file and then asks for a heading therein,
using minibuffer completion. Once the user provides input at the two
prompts, the command inserts a link at point which has the following
pattern: `[[denote:IDENTIFIER::#ORG-HEADING-CUSTOM-ID]][Description::Heading text]]`.

Because only Org files can have links to individual headings, the
command `denote-org-extras-link-to-heading` prompts only for Org files
(i.e. files which include the `.org` extension). Remember that Denote
works with many file types.

This feature is similar to the concept of the aforementioned user
option `denote-org-store-link-to-heading`. It is, however, interactive
and differs in the directionality of the action. With that user
option, the command `org-store-link` will generate a `CUSTOM_ID` for
the current heading (or capture the value of one as-is), giving the
user the option to then call `org-insert-link` wherever they see fit.
By contrast, the command `denote-org-extras-link-to-heading` prompts
for a file, then a heading, and inserts the link at point.


### Refinements galore to minibuffer prompts


#### All commands that affect file names conform with `denote-prompts`

The scope of the `denote-prompts` user option is broadened to make it
more useful. In the past, this variable would only affect the
behaviour of the `denote` command. For example, the user would make
the command prompt for a subdirectory, then keywords, then a title.
But all other commands were not following this setting, as they were
hardcoding the prompts for title and keywords.

Take the `denote-subdirectory` command as an example. It would first
prompt for a subdirectory to place the new note in, then for a title,
and then for keywords. Whereas now, it prepends the `subdirectory`
prompt to the list of `denote-prompts`. So if the user has configured
their `denote-prompts` to, for example, ask for a signature and a file
type, the `denote-subdirectory` will do just that with the addition of
the `subdirectory` prompt.

Same idea for all commands that either create or modify file names,
wherever conformity with `denote-prompts` makes sense. For example,
the `denote-rename-file` will never ask for a `subdirectory` because
our renaming policy is to always rename in place (to avoid
mistakes&#x2014;you can always move the file afterwards).

This also means that the `denote-rename-file` and its multi-file
counterpart, `denote-dired-rename-files`, will only prompt for a
signature if it is part of the `denote-prompts`. Whereas in the
previous version this was unconditional, thus burdening users who do
not need the `SIGNATURE` file name component (more about renaming
further into the release notes).

Lots of Git commits went into this redesign, per my initiave in issue
247: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/247>. Thanks to
Vedang Manerikar for the changes to the convenience wrappers of the
`denote` command (like `denote-subdirectory`), which were done in pull
request 248: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/248>.

Vedang has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

Also thanks to Max Brieiev for joining the technical discussion
therein.

The renaming commands are more intuitive now, which addresses a
discussion point raised by user babusri in issue 204:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/204>.


#### A simple tweak for more informative minibuffer prompts

The text of each prompt now has all capital letters for the word
referencing its scope of its application, like `TITLE`, `KEYWORDS`,
`SIGNATURE`. The idea is to make it easier to quickly scan the text,
especially while working through multiple prompts. For example, the
prompt for a title now reads:

    New file TITLE:

This paradigm is followed by all prompts. It is a small yet effective
tweak to get a better sense of context.


#### The file prompt uses relative names once again

In previous versions of Denote, the minibuffer prompt to pick a file
(such as a file to link to) would show relative file names: the name
without the full file system path. The functionality depended on the
built-in `project.el` library, which did not allow us to do everything
we wanted with our prompts, such as to have a dedicated minibuffer
history or to easily enable the workflow of commands like
`denote-open-or-create`.

In the previous version, I made the decision to remove the
`project.el` dependency and the concomitant presentation of relative
names in order to add the functionality we want. I did it with the
intention to find a better solution down the line. Et voilá! Relative
file names are back. We now have all the functionality we need. Sorry
if in the meantime you had to deal with those longer names! It was a
necessary intermediate arrangement for the greater good.

For the technicalities, refer to the source code of the function
`denote-title-prompt`.


#### Completion using previous inputs is now optional

All our minibuffer prompts have their dedicated history (you can
persist histories with the built-in `savehist-mode`). They store
previous values, giving the user easy access to their past input
values. Some of our commands not only record a history, but also
leverage it to provide completion. These commands are named in the
variable `denote-prompts-with-history-as-completion`. As of this
writing, they are:

-   `denote-title-prompt`
-   `denote-signature-prompt`
-   `denote-files-matching-regexp-prompt`

Users who do not want to use completion for those can set the new user
option `denote-history-completion-in-prompts` to a nil value.


### Renaming files got better all-round

One of the pillars of the `denote` package is its ability to rename
any file to use the efficient Denote file-naming scheme (makes file
names predictable and easy to retrieve even with rudimentary tools).
To this end, we provide several commands that affect file names,
beside the commands that create new files.

As noted above, the commands which rename files to follow the Denote
file-naming scheme now conform with the user option `denote-prompts`,
but there is more!


#### A broadened scope for the `denote-rename-no-confirm` option

The implementation of this user option is redone (i) to save the
underlying buffer outright if the user does not want to provide their
confirmation for a rename each time and (ii) to cover all relevant
commands that perform a rename operation. The assumption is that the
user who opts in to this feature is familiar with the Denote renaming
modalities and knows they are reliable.

The default is still the same: Denote always asks for confirmation
before renaming a file, showing the difference between the old and new
names, as well as any changes to the file&rsquo;s contents. In this light,
buffers are not saved to give the user the chance to further inspect
the changes (such as by running `diff-buffer-with-file`).

Commands that will now skip all confirmation prompts to rename the file
and, where relevant, save the corresponding buffer outright:

-   `denote-rename-file`
-   `denote-dired-rename-files`
-   `denote-dired-rename-marked-files-with-keywords`
-   `denote-rename-file-using-front-matter`
-   `denote-rename-add-keywords`
-   `denote-rename-remove-keywords`
-   `denote-rename-add-signature` (new, more below)
-   `denote-rename-remove-signature` (new, more below)


#### Rename a file by adding or removing a `SIGNATURE` component

The `SIGNATURE` is an optional free-form field that is part of a
Denote file name. A common use-case is to write sequence notes with
it, though Denote does not enforce any particular convention (you may
prefer to have it as a special kind of keyword for certain files that
simply stands out more due to its placement).

[ Besides, the `denote-sort-dired` command lets you filter and sort
  files while putting them in a fully fledged Dired buffer, so
  manually sequencing notes via their signature may not be needed. ]

We now provide two commands to add or remove a signature from file
names:

-   The `denote-rename-add-signature` prompts for a file and a
    signature. The default value for the file prompt is the file of the
    currently open buffer or the file-at-point in a Dired buffer. The
    signature is an ordinary string, defaulting to the selected file&rsquo;s
    signature, if any.

-   The `denote-rename-remove-signature` uses the same file prompt as
    above. It performs its action only if the selected file has a
    signature. Otherwise, it does nothing.

Files that do not have a Denote file name are renamed accordingly.
Though for such cases it is better to use `denote-rename-file` or
`denote-dired-rename-files` as they are more general.


#### Use the `denote-after-rename-file-hook` for optional post-rename operations

All renaming commands run the `denote-after-rename-file-hook` after a
successful operation. This is meant for users who want to do something
specific after the renaming is done.


### More optional features of the `denote-org-extras.el`

I already covered the `denote-org-extras-link-to-heading`, though the
file `denote-org-extras.el` has some more optional goodies for those
who work with Org files.


#### Create a note from the current Org subtree

In Org parlance, an entry with all its subheadings and other contents
is a &ldquo;subtree&rdquo;. Denote can operate on the subtree to extract it from
the current file and create a new file out of it. One such workflow is
to collect thoughts in a single document and produce longer standalone
notes out of them upon review.

The command `denote-org-extras-extract-org-subtree` (part of the
optional `denote-org-extras.el` extension) is used for this purpose.
It creates a new Denote note using the current Org subtree. In doing
so, it removes the subtree from its current file and moves its
contents into a new file.

The text of the subtree&rsquo;s heading becomes the `#+title` of the new
note. Everything else is inserted as-is.

Read the documentation string of `denote-org-extras-extract-org-subtree`
or consult the manual for further details.


#### Convert `denote:` links to `file:` links

Sometimes the user needs to translate all `denote:` link types to
their `file:` equivalent. This may be because some other tool does not
recognise `denote:` links (or other custom links types&#x2014;which are a
standard feature of Org, by the way). The user thus needs to (i)
either make a copy of their Denote note or edit the existing one, and
(ii) convert all links to the generic `file:` link type that
external/other programs understand.

The optional extension `denote-org-extras.el` contains two commands
that are relevant for this use-case:

-   **Convert `denote:` links to `file:` links:** The command
    `denote-org-extras-convert-links-to-file-type` goes through the
    buffer to find all `denote:` links. It gets the identifier of the
    link and resolves it to the actual file system path. It then
    replaces the match so that the link is written with the `file:` type
    and then the file system path. The optional search terms and/or link
    description are preserved.

-   **Convert `file:` links to `denote:` links:** The command
    `denote-org-extras-convert-links-to-denote-type` behaves like the
    one above. The difference is that it finds the file system path and
    converts it into its identifier.


#### The Denote Org dynamic blocks are now in `denote-org-extras.el`

As part of this version, all our dynamic blocks are defined in the
file `denote-org-extras.el`. The file which once contained these block
definitions, `denote-org-dblock.el`, now only has aliases for the new
function names and dipslays a warning about its deprecation.

There is no need to `require` the `denote-org-extras` feature because
all of Denote&rsquo;s Org dynamic blocks are autoloaded (meaning that they
work as soon as they are used). For backward compatibility, all
dynamic blocks retain their original names as an alias for the newer
one.

We will not remove `denote-org-dblock.el` anytime soon to avoid any
potential breakage with people&rsquo;s existing notes. Though if you are new
to this functionality, you better avoid the deprecated symbols.


#### Org dynamic block to only insert missing links

The `denote-missing-links` block is available with the command
`denote-org-extras-dblock-insert-missing-links`. It is like the
`denote-links` block (documented at length in the manual), except it
only lists links to files that are not present in the current buffer.
The parameters are otherwise the same:

    #+BEGIN: denote-missing-links :regexp "YOUR REGEXP HERE" :sort-by-component nil :reverse-sort nil :id-only nil

    #+END:

Remember to type `C-c C-x C-u` (`org-dblock-update`) with point on the
`#+BEGIN` line to update the block.

This brings back a feature that was deprecated in version 2.2.0, but
makes changes to it so that (i) it is more limited in scope and (ii)
available as a standalone Org dynamic block.

Thanks to Stephen R. Kifer, Peter Prevos, and Elias Storms for the
discussion which made it clear to me that users do have a need for
such functionality. This was done in the now-defunct mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/%3C1db2104e-70bd-47f9-a7ed-b8d4bb370a7f%40app.fastmail.com%3E>.

Also thanks to Vedang Manerikar for fixing an edge case bug. This was
done in pull request 260: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/260>.

Org dynamic blocks are a powerful feature which also showcases how far
we can go with Denote&rsquo;s efficient file-naming scheme.


### Quality-of-life improvements

Here I include other changes we made to existing functionality.


#### BREAKING User-defined sluggification of file name components

In the previous version, we introduced the user option
`denote-file-name-letter-casing`. This was used to control the letter
casing of file name components, but was ultimately not flexible enough
for our purposes. We are thus retiring it and replacing it with the
more powerful, but also more advanced, user option
`denote-file-name-slug-functions`.

For existing users of the deprecated functionality, you can still
preserve the input of a prompt verbatim with something like this:

    (setq denote-file-name-slug-functions
          '((title . denote-sluggify-title)
            (keyword . identity)
            (signature . denote-sluggify-signature)))

The manual explains the details and shows ready-to-use code samples.

Remember that deviating from the default file-naming scheme of Denote
will make things harder to use in the future, as files will have
permutations that create uncertainty. The sluggification scheme and
concomitant restrictions we impose by default are there for a very
good reason: they are the distillation of years of experience. Here we
give you what you wish, but bear in mind it may not be what you need.
You have been warned.

Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for introducing this variable,
among other tweaks, in pull request 217: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/217>.
Jean-Philippe has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


#### Option to automatically save the buffer of a new note

The user option `denote-save-buffer-after-creation` controls whether
commands that create new notes save their buffer right away.

The default behaviour of commands such as `denote` (or related) is to
not save the buffer they create. This gives the user the chance to
review the text before writing it to a file. The user may choose to
delete the unsaved buffer, thus not creating a new file on disk.

If `denote-save-buffer-after-creation` is set to a non-nil value, such
buffers are saved automatically and so the file is written to disk.


#### The `denote-menu-bar-mode` and the placement of the Denote submenu

The command `denote-menu-bar-mode` toggles the inclusion of the
submenu with the Denote entries in the Emacs menu bar (which is on
display when `menu-bar-mode` is enabled).

This submenu is now shown after the `Tools` entry.

Thanks to Joseph Turner for sending me the relevant patches. Joseph
has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


#### The `C-c C-o` works in `markdown-mode` for Denote links

In files whose major mode is `markdown-mode`, the default key binding
`C-c C-o` (which calls the command `markdown-follow-thing-at-point`)
correctly resolves `denote:` links. This method works in addition to
the `RET` key, which is made available by the buttonization that we
also provide. Interested users can refer to the function
`denote-link-markdown-follow` for the implementation details.

Thanks to user pmenair for noting a case where this was breaking
general Markdown linking functionality. This was done in issue 290:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/290>.


#### More fine-grained control of Denote faces for dates/identifiers

We now define more faces for fine-grained control of the identifier in
Dired. Thanks to mentalisttraceur for suggesting the idea in issue
276: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/276>.

Before you ask, no, none of my themes will cover those faces because
extra colouration is something only the user can decide if they want
or not. In the above link I provide a sample with a screenshot (apart
from the `modus-themes`, my `ef-themes` and `standard-themes` have
similar functionality):

    (defun my-modus-themes-denote-faces (&rest _)
      (modus-themes-with-colors
        (custom-set-faces
         `(denote-faces-year ((,c :foreground ,cyan)))
         `(denote-faces-month ((,c :foreground ,magenta-warmer)))
         `(denote-faces-day ((,c :foreground ,cyan)))
         `(denote-faces-time-delimiter ((,c :foreground ,fg-main)))
         `(denote-faces-hour ((,c :foreground ,magenta-warmer)))
         `(denote-faces-minute ((,c :foreground ,cyan)))
         `(denote-faces-second ((,c :foreground ,magenta-warmer))))))

    (add-hook 'modus-themes-post-load-hook #'my-modus-themes-denote-faces)


#### New convenience command for users of the optional `denote-journal-extras.el`

The command `denote-journal-extras-link-or-create-entry` links to the
journal entry for today or creates it in the background, if missing,
and then links to it from the current file. If there are multiple
journal entries for the same day, it prompts to select one among them
and then links to it. When called with an optional prefix argument
(such as `C-u` with default key bindings), the command prompts for a
date and then performs the aforementioned. With a double prefix
argument (`C-u C-u`), it also produces a link whose description
includes just the file&rsquo;s identifier.

Thanks to Alan Schmitt for contributing this command, based on
previous discussions. It was done in pull request 243:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/243>.


### For developers or advanced users

These has new parameters or are new symbols altogether. Please read
their respective doc string for the details.

-   Function `denote-convert-file-name-keywords-to-crm`.
-   Function `denote-valid-date-p`.
-   Function `denote-parse-date`.
-   Function `denote-retrieve-title-or-filename`.
-   Function `denote-get-identifier`.
-   Function `denote-signature-prompt`.
-   Function `denote-file-prompt`.
-   Function `denote-keywords-prompt`.
-   Function `denote-title-prompt`.
-   Function `denote-rewrite-front-matter`.
-   Function `denote-rewrite-keywords`.
-   Function `denote-update-dired-buffers`.
-   Function `denote-format-string-for-org-front-matter`.
-   Function `denote-format-string-for-md-front-matter`.
-   Variable `denote-link-signature-format`.
-   Function `denote-link-description-with-signature-and-title`.
-   Variable `denote-link-description-function`.


### Miscellaneous

-   The `denote-sort-dired` function no longer errors out when there is
    no match for the given search terms. Thanks to Vedang Manerikar for
    the initial patch! This was done in the now-defunct mailing list:
    <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/denote/patches/47625>. Further
    changes by me.

-   The `denote-keywords-sort` function no longer tries to sort keywords
    that are not a list. Thanks to Ashton Wiersdorf for the patch. The
    change is small. As such, Ashton does not need to assign copyright
    to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Documented in the manual that custom convenience commands can be
    accessed by the `denote-command-prompt`. Thanks to Glenna D. for
    clarifying the language.

-   The `denote-user-enforced-denote-directory` is obsolete. Those who
    used it in their custom code can simply `let` bind the value of the
    variable `denote-directory`. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for
    making the relevant changes (the Git history is not direct here and
    I cannot quickly find the pull request&#x2014;the commit is `a48a1da`).

-   The `denote-link-return-links` no longer keeps buffers around.
    Thanks to Matteo Cavada for the patch. This was done in pull request
    252: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/252>. The change is
    small and so Matteo does not need to assign copyright to the Free
    Software Foundation.

-   Thanks to user jarofromel (recorded in Git as &ldquo;random&rdquo; author) for
    fixing a mismatched parenthesis in `denote-parse-date`. This was
    done in pull request 258: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/258>.

-   The `denote-rename-buffer-mode` now works as expected with
    non-editable files, like PDFs. Thanks to Alan Schmitt for bringing
    this matter to my attention and then refining the implementation
    details in pull request 268: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/268>.

-   All the Denote linking functions can be used from any file outside
    the `denote-directory` (links are still resolved to files inside the
    `denote-directory`). Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the
    contribution in pull request 236: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/236>.

-   We removed all glue code that integrated Denote with the built-in
    `ffap`, `xref`, and `project` libraries. We may reconsider how best
    to organise such features in the future. Thanks to Noboru Ota
    (nobiot), who originally contributed those extensions, for
    suggesting their removal from our code base. We did this by
    evaluating all use-cases. The discussion with Noboru happened in
    issue 264: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/264>. Also
    thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay and Alan Schnmitt for checking
    the impact of this on how we generate backlinks. The latest
    iteration of this was done in pull request 294, by Jean-Philippe:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/294>.

-   While renaming files, signatures no longer lose consecutive spaces.
    Thanks to Wesley Harvey for the contribution in pull request 207:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/207>. The change is
    within the ~15 line limit and so Wesley does not need to assign
    copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   All of the above and lots more are documented at length in the
    manual. This is a big task in its own right (as are release notes,
    by the way), though it ensures we keep a high standard for the
    entire package and can communicate all our knowledge to the user.


### No more SourceHut

Development continues on GitHub with GitLab as a mirror. I explained
my reasons here: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-01-27-sourcehut-no-more/>.

This is a change that affects all my Emacs packages.


### Forward guidance for Denote version 3.0.0

We will not any new features until mid-April or a bit later if
necessary. This gives users enough time to report any potential issues
with version `2.3.0`. If there are any bugs, they will be fixed right
away and new minor releases will be introduced (though without release
notes).

Once we are done with this release cycle, we want to prepare for the
next major version of Denote. The plan is to make the placement of
file name components entirely customisable, among many other power
user features. Though the defaults will remain intact.

For the immediate future, please prioritise bug reports/fixes. Then
see you around for another round of hacking. The Denote code base is a
pleasure to work with due to how composable everything is. I happy to
make it even better for developers and users alike.


### Git commits

Just an overview of what we did. Thanks again to everyone involved.

    ~/Git/Projects/denote $ git shortlog 2.2.0..2.3.0 --summary --numbered
       246	Protesilaos Stavrou
        46	Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
         6	Vedang Manerikar
         3	Joseph Turner
         2	Alan Schmitt
         2	Max
         2	Peter Prevos
         1	Ashton Wiersdorf
         1	Glenna D.
         1	Matteo Cavada
         1	mattyonweb
         1	random
         1	wlharvey4


### All contributions are valuable

I encourage you to provide feedback on any of the functionality of the
Denote package. You do not need to be a developer or indeed an expert
in Emacs. When you have an idea in mind on how you use Denote, or you
think something could be done differently, please speak your mind. I
do listen to feedback and am interested in further improving this
package. Everybody is welcome!
