---
title: 'Emacs: logos version 1.2.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my logos package for GNU Emacs.'
---

This package provides a simple approach to setting up a "focus mode".
It uses the `page-delimiter` (typically `^L`) or the outline together
with some commands to move between pages whether narrowing is in effect
or not.  It also provides some optional aesthetic tweaks which come into
effect when the buffer-local `logos-focus-mode` is enabled.  The manual
shows how to extend the code to achieve the desired result.

(all my videos since early 2022 where I show parts of code use `logos`).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `logos`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/logos-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/logos>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/logos>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-11-emacs-logos-demo/>
+ Backronyms: `^L` Only Generates Ostensible Slides; Logos Optionally Goes through Outline Sections.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 1.2.0 on 2024-09-03

This version introduces minor refinements to an already stable
package.


### The `logos-update-fringe-in-buffers` works with `enable-theme-functions`

It is possible to hide the fringes when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled
by setting the user option `logos-hide-fringe` to a non-nil value. To
make sure that the proper colours are applied when the theme changes,
users must also set up the `logos-update-fringe-in-buffers` to run
after the theme is loaded.

In versions of Emacs before 29 there was no standard way to do this
(my themes (Modus, Ef, Standard) have always had the relevant "post
load" hook). With Emacs 29, users can now use the `enable-theme-functions`
to make this work with all themes:

```elisp
(add-hook 'enable-theme-functions #'logos-update-fringe-in-buffers)
```

### New `logos-hide-header-line` user option for `logos-focus-mode`

Users can now optionally hide the header-line when `logos-focus-mode`
is enabled in the current buffer. This is done by setting `logos-hide-header-line`
to a non-nil value and then enabling the mode.

[ Remember to read the manual for all such options. ]


### Documented how to conditionally toggle `org-indent-mode`

The `logos-focus-mode` operates in the current buffer to make the
changes that are needed for a more "focused" editing experience. Here
we extend it to work with Org's virtual indentation.

It disables `org-indent-mode` when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled and
restores it when `logos-focus-mode` is disabled.  The
`logos-set-mode-arg` function takes care of the technicalities.

```elisp
(defun my-logos-org-indent ()
  (when logos-focus-mode
    (logos-set-mode-arg 'org-indent-mode -1)))

(add-hook 'logos-focus-mode-hook #'my-logos-org-indent)
```

### Documented how to toggle the menu-bar, tool-bar, tab-bar, and tab-line

Continuing from above, the following code block below shows how to
disable the `menu-bar-mode`, `tool-bar-mode`, `tab-bar-mode`, and
`tab-line-mode` when `logos-focus-mode` is enabled. If the given mode
is already disabled, the corresponding function does nothing.
Otherwise, it toggles the mode off/on when `logos-focus-mode` is
enabled/disabled.

```elisp
(defun my-logos-hide-menu-bar ()
  (when logos-focus-mode
    (logos-set-mode-arg 'menu-bar-mode -1)))

(add-hook 'logos-focus-mode-hook #'my-logos-hide-menu-bar)

;; Assuming the `tool-bar-mode' is enabled by default...
(defun my-logos-hide-tool-bar ()
  (when logos-focus-mode
    (logos-set-mode-arg 'tool-bar-mode -1)))

(add-hook 'logos-focus-mode-hook #'my-logos-hide-tool-bar)

;; Assuming the `tab-bar-mode' is enabled by default...
(defun my-logos-hide-tab-bar ()
  (when logos-focus-mode
    (logos-set-mode-arg 'tab-bar-mode -1)))

(add-hook 'logos-focus-mode-hook #'my-logos-hide-tab-bar)

;; Assuming the `tab-line-mode' is enabled by default...
(defun my-logos-hide-tab-line ()
  (when logos-focus-mode
    (logos-set-mode-arg 'tab-line-mode -1)))

(add-hook 'logos-focus-mode-hook #'my-logos-hide-tab-line)
```

### Fixed a malformed `cond`

This was affecting the `logos-narrow-dwim` function in some cases.
Thanks to Edgar Vincent for the contribution, which happened in the
now-defunct mailing list.
