---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.9.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` are a collection of light and dark themes for GNU
Emacs that provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for users
who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes` (also
designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 1.9.0 on 2024-11-16

This version introduces several small refinements to an already
comprehensive basis.


### No interference with `org-modern`

The `org-modern` package is not meant to be touched by a theme. This
is what I am doing with the `modus-themes`, but I forgot to remove the
changes made by the `ef-themes`.

Thanks to Daniel Mendler, author of `org-modern`, for bringing this
matter to my attention. This was done in issue 48:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/48>.


### Colour refinements for several themes

I document those, though most of them will not be noticeable, unless
on a side-by-side comparison.

-   The `ef-day` palette value for `green-warmer` has a marginally
    greater contribution from the red channel of light, making it a tiny
    bit "warmer". The `green-faint` is made less warm. In context, these
    tweaks make certain elements easier to tell apart, while retaining
    the character of the theme.

-   The `ef-reverie` value for `blue-faint` is less saturated, so its
    blue impression is diminished. It still performs its role in all the
    relevant contexts, only now it does it better by not competing with
    other shades of blue.

-   The `ef-light` value for `fg-dim` is much less intense, though still
    within the desired contrast range. This way, it works better in
    context. The "added" background colours (used in `diff-mode`, Ediff,
    Magit, etc.) are a little bit more intense to be more harmonious
    with other elements in a diff output. The `blue-faint` has lower
    contribution from the blue channel of light in the interest of not
    interfering with other blue hues, while still looking alright
    itself. The semantic palette mapping for links now uses the
    `blue-warmer` colour instead of `blue`, as the former is less
    ambiguous in context. The `fg-alt` is recalibrated to be closer to a
    grey value, improving its use in several places. The `red-cooler`
    value is redone to not be conflated with magenta: it now delivers a
    rosy red impression. Lastly, the `rainbow-2` mapping uses `magenta`
    instead of `magenta-warmer` for consistency in all relevant
    situations.

-   The `ef-night` semantic colour mapping of `preprocessor` is toned
    down in intensity to remove what was a stylistic exaggeration. The
    `variable` mapping is tweaked to use `cyan-warmer` instead of the
    `cyan` colour, as the former is slightly more suited to the role due
    to how it combines with other colours. The `type` semantic mapping
    is bound to a less intense shade of magenta, making it not overpower
    other constructs in a competition for attention. Finally, the value
    of the `magenta-faint` colour has a greater contribution from the
    blue channel of light to shift its hue slightly closer to purple.

-   The `ef-deuteranopia-light` palette entry for `red-faint` is more
    yellow to be discernible where needed. Similarly, the `cyan-cooler`
    has a reduced contribution from the red channel of light.

    [ Note that the "deuteranopia" and "tritanopia" themes define all
      colours in the palette to be consistent with the overall project,
      but only use hues that are appropriate for red-green and blue-yellow
      colour deficiency, respectively. ]

-   The "subtle" backgrounds of all themes (e.g. `bg-red-subtle`) are
    redone to feel more natural in the context of their respective
    theme. Before, some values were a bit exaggerated and/or not aligned
    with the overall aesthetic. Still, the changes are small: do not
    expect your preferred theme to be refashioned.


### More accurate faces for Org agenda dates

The faces used by Org agenda to style events with a scheduled date or
deadline are redesigned to better complement the semantics of what is
on display. Pressing tasks stand out more, while those that do not
require immediate attention are rendered in a more subtle style.

Thanks to Adam Porter (aka GitHub alphapapa) for suggesting this
revision and discussing the technicalities with me. This was done in
issue 102 of the Modus themes repository (but the principles apply to
the Ef themes as well): <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/102>.


### The `forge` package is fully supported

All of its faces will now look consistent in context as they get the
appropriate colours of the active Ef theme.

Thanks to Len Trigg for reporting that some attributes were not
suitable for the intended purpose of certain Forge faces. I fixed
those accordingly. This was done in issue 47:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/47>.


### Support for the `tldr` package

This makes it look consistent with the rest of the theme.


### Support for the built-in `window-tool-bar-mode`

This is a mode available in Emacs 30. Its faces will look right at all
times.


### Support for the built-in `hexl-mode`

Instead of using shades of grey backgrounds, the themes use carefully
chosen foreground values that are easier to spot.


### The `embark` faces are brought up-to-date

Old symbols are removed and the current ones are added in their stead.


### Miscellaneous

-   The `:background-mode` property of the `ef-melissa-dark` theme is
    set to the correct symbol. Thanks to Pedro Cunha for making the
    change in pull request 46: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/pull/46>.
    The change is small, so Pedro does not need to assign copyright to
    the Free Software Foundation.

-   Graphical buttons inherit the `ef-themes-button` face, which makes
    it easier to ensure theme-wide consistency for all relevant faces.

-   The `all-the-icons` faces for Ibuffer use different colours that
    refine how everything looks in context.

-   The popup produced by the `corfu` and `company` packages will use a
    monospaced font (inherit from `fixed-pitch`) if the user option
    `ef-themes-mixed-fonts` is set to a non-nil value.

-   The annotation function used by the command `ef-themes-select` or
    related now uses the `completions-annotations` face, as it should.
