---
title: 'Emacs: tmr version 1.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my TMR package for GNU Emacs.'
---

TMR is an Emacs package that provides facilities for setting timers
using a convenient notation.  Lots of commands are available to operate
on timers, while there also exists a tabulated view to display all
timers in a nice grid.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `tmr`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/tmr>
+ Backronym: TMR May Ring; Timer Must Run.

Below are the release notes.

* * *


## Version 1.0.0 on 2024-08-30

This version adds quality-of-life improvements to an already stable
base.


### The `tmr-with-details` supersedes the `tmr-with-description`

The `tmr-with-description` would always prompt for a time input and
then a description of the resulting timer object. We now provide a
more general command, `tmr-with-details`, which does this in addition
to an extra prompt for an acknowledgement. What an "acknowledgement"
is, is documented in the following section.


### Timers can now be "acknowledged"

Normally, when a timer elapses it does not stick around to notify the
user again and again. This means that the user may miss the one
notification if, say, they were away from the computer. As such, we
now provide an opt-in mechanism where a timer persists until it is
explicitly acknowledged as finished. The acknowledgement is either an
additional duration for the timer to produce another notification in
the future, or an explicit consent from the timer to count as
finished. The goal is to help the user never miss a timer.

Setting up an acknowledgement can be done in the following ways:

-   Call the standard `tmr` command with a prefix argument (`C-u` by
    default). This will make it prompt for a description and an
    acknowledgement.

-   Use the new command `tmr-with-details`, which asks for a timer
    input, a description, and whether to include an acknowledgement
    prompt.

-   Use the new command `tmr-toggle-acknowledge`, which will prompt for
    a timer and then toggle the acknowledgement status on/off. In this
    scenario, the timer already exists (e.g. it was created with `tmr`
    without a prefix argument).

All timers are listed in a nice list with the command
`tmr-tabulated-view`. An extra column will indicate their
acknowledgement status.

Thanks to Daniel Mendler for contributing this feature. This was done
in the form of patches, sent via email. Daniel has assigned copyright
to the Free Software Foundation.


### The `tmr-list-timers` is an alias for `tmr-tabulated-view`

Perhaps the "list timers" is a more meaningful description of what the
command does, as opposed to "tabulated view".


### Use the `tmr-prefix-map`

We now define a prefix keymap that users can bind directly to a key
and get all the TMR commands in one go. For example, this adds all TMR
commands behind the `C-c t` prefix:

    (define-key global-map (kbd "C-c t") 'tmr-prefix-map)

Thanks to Daniel Mendler for this patch.


### TMR uses its own faces

Theme developers or users can now modify how the various TMR
indicators look by tweaking the faces we provide:

-   `tmr-duration`
-   `tmr-description`
-   `tmr-start-time`
-   `tmr-end-time`
-   `tmr-is-acknowledged`
-   `tmr-must-be-acknowledged`
-   `tmr-finished`

The default values inherit from basic faces that should be supported
everywhere.

Existing users will not notice any visual difference, other things
being equal.


### Fixed some typos in the manual

Thanks to Ed Tavinor for the contribution. The change pertains to
typos and is within the limit of edits that do not require copyright
assignment to the Free Software Foundation.
