---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.8.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` are a collection of light and dark themes for GNU
Emacs that provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for users
who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes` (also
designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 1.8.0 on 2024-08-27

The `ef-themes` package is in a stable state. The collection covers a
wide spectrum of tastes while maintaining a high standard of legibility.
I have made a few quality-of-life refinements and added two exciting
new themes.


### Enjoy the `ef-eagle` and `ef-owl` themes

These are the two new members of the collection. Both draw inspiration
from the large predatory birds I encounter in my mountains. Both
themes avoid the use of highly saturated colours.

-   `ef-eagle` is a light theme with varying shades of brown and
    complementary colours.

-   `ef-owl` is a dark theme with varying shades of silverblue and
    complementary colours.

The announcement I made on my blog about these two themes includes
pictures of them: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-08-19-ef-eagle-and-owl-themes/>.


### The "midnight" mode of `pdf-tools` is supported

The `pdf-tools` package provides the `pdf-view-midnight-minor-mode`,
which applies dark colours to the document. Those colours will now be
taken from the active theme, resulting in a more consistent reading
experience.


### Org checkboxes are monospaced if needed

When the user sets the option `ef-themes-mixed-fonts` to a non-nil
value, the Org checkboxes will be rendered in a monospaced font
(technically, they inherit the `fixed-pitch` face). This is done to
preserve the alignment of items when `variable-pitch-mode` is enabled
(or the user sets a proportionately spaced font as their default).

Remember that the point of "mixed fonts" is to use monospacing for
those elements that are space-sensitive, like code blocks and tables.

Thanks to Gautier Ponsinet for making the Org checkboxes conform with
this design. The change is small and thus does not require copyright
assignment to the Free Software Foundation.


### The `elisp-shorthand-font-lock-face` is now easier to spot

This is a way for Emacs packages to define so-called "shorthands" of
short prefixes in symbols that are aliases for longer ones. For
example, `my-long-package-name-prefix` may be expressed as `mlp` in
the source code. These shorthands will now use a style that is not
found anywhere else in Elisp code, making them stand out more.


### A better "alt" foreground for `ef-melissa-light` and `ef-melissa-dark`

The themes define an alternative foreground colour which is used for
ancillary elements such as Org property drawers. For
`ef-melissa-light` and `ef-melissa-dark` this colour is easier to tell
apart from the colour used for comments. It still retains the same
pleasant quality of being easy-to-read without calling too much
attention to itself.


### The new `bg-search-match` semantic colour mapping

Each theme has a palette that defines named colours and semantic
mappings. These are useful for my purposes while developing the
themes, but also for users who have the option to override the palette
(check the manual for further details).

The `bg-search-match` is used for "matches" that are persistent in
search results, such as in Occur and Grep buffers. The colour in use
is the same as it was before, except that the user can now modify it
directly.
