---
title: 'Emacs: modus-themes version 4.4.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published the latest stable release of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The change log
entry is reproduced further below.  For any questions, feel welcome to
[contact me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will soon install the changes in emacs.git so please wait a little
longer for the updates to trickle down to you.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `modus-themes` (also built into Emacs 28+)
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-changelog>
+ Colour palette: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-colors>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Backronym: My Old Display Unexpectedly Sharpened ... themes.

* * *

Before I cover the changes, a brief note about the canonical source of
the `modus-themes` source code and corresponding documentation.

The `modus-themes` are built into Emacs, as of version 28, but they
are not developed in `emacs.git`: I maintain my own Git repository
(<https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>) and sync with
`emacs.git` whenever I publish a new version, such as this one. This
means that my code is often ahead of the one in the Emacs tree
(including the `master` branch). Similarly, the official manual, which
is hosted on my website (<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>),
covers topics not found in the corresponding `gnu.org` web pages.

In the opening section of the manual I include references to the
canonical sources, but I still get comments about GNU web pages that I
do not control. Please check those links before reporting issues that
I can do nothing about.


## No more SourceHut

Development continues on GitHub with GitLab as a mirror. I explained
my reasons here: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-01-27-sourcehut-no-more/>.

This is a change that affects all my Emacs packages.


## Code blocks now have a background by default

The user option `modus-themes-org-blocks` is obsolete. All code blocks
now have a subtle grey background out-of-the-box. The block delimiter
lines, such as the `#+begin_src` in Org mode, use the same background
as the block's contents. This produces a style that (i) is easy to
notice and (ii) employs minimal colouration. Furthermore, we no longer
have any discrepancy between Org and similar modes like Markdown.

Every theme has relevant semantic palette mappings to affect the
underlying faces:

-   `bg-prose-block-delimiter`
-   `fg-prose-block-delimiter`
-   `bg-prose-block-contents`

The old `prose-block` is now renamed to `fg-prose-block-delimiter`.
Please update any such references in your configuration file.

Users can customise those either for all themes via the user option
`modus-themes-common-palette-overrides`  or on a per-theme basis with
something like `modus-operandi-palette-overrides`. The manual includes
ready-to-use code samples that showcases the numerous permutations made
possible by these new mappings: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:f44cc6e3-b0f1-4a5e-8a90-9e48fa557b50>.

The old option to affect the user option `org-src-block-faces` as to
have a different background for each specified programming language is
no longer available. The previous design was inflexible, as I was
hardcoding values for a few languages. Whereas it is better to empower
the user with the choice of `language->colour` association. The manual
shows how to do this:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:8c842804-43b7-4287-b4e9-8c07d04d1f89>.


## More semantic mappings more inline code in prose-centric modes

For Org, Markdown, and related we have semantic palette mappings that
target inline code constructs. For example, in Org we can have text
inside of tilde signs to mark it up as code. In prior versions, the
mappings were limited to just a foreground, but now they cover
background values as well. By default, these background do not have a
colour associated with them, meaning that the out-of-the-box aesthetic
is the same as before. Users simply have more power at their disposal
to tweak the theme to their liking.

Here are the names of those mappings:

-   `bg-prose-code`
-   `fg-prose-code`
-   `bg-prose-macro`
-   `fg-prose-macro`
-   `bg-prose-verbatim`
-   `fg-prose-verbatim`

The old `prose-code`, `prose-macro`, and `prose-verbatim` are named
`fg-prose-code`, `fg-prose-macro`, `fg-prose-verbatim`. Please
update any such references in your configuration file.

The manual shows lots of examples on how to benefit from these
optional backgrounds: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:bb5b396f-5532-4d52-ab13-149ca24854f1>.


## No colour-coding for `transient.el` buffers.

In a recent version of `transient.el`, there is a new user option that
applies colour-coding to keys (e.g. we see those while using `magit`):
`transient-semantic-coloring`. This option is enabled by default,
changing the previous style that was used as a reference for all my
designs.

The idea with such colour coding is to indicate when a key continues
to display the transient, exits with a given action, and the like. For
our purposes this interface cannot work:

-   We need some place to teach users what each colour means, as there
    are no indicators of any sort to help them (whereas, say, in diff
    buffers we have the plus and minus signs).

-   Not all hues are suitable for highlighting a single character. In
    light themes, for example, green and yellow colours are awkward
    choices for the requirements of this interface where the key must be
    clearly visible. But when we introduce multiple colours, each with
    their own meaning, we will not be able to avoid those hues.

-   The style of key bindings is not limited to `transient.el`. We find
    them when we invoke `M-x`, do `M-x describe-bindings`, while using
    the `which-key` package, and many more. If we are to change how
    `transient.el` shows key bindings, then we have to retain the same
    visual cues for other contexts. Otherwise, everything is inconsistent.

-   All themes must use the same colours to preserve the colour coding,
    thus removing an important aspect of their presentation.

-   This whole paradigm does not work for themes that are optimised for
    users with colour deficiency, due to the reduced number of suitable
    hues. With deuteranopia, for example, we can only rely on yellow and
    blue: since yellow is not optimal for single key highlights against
    a light backdrop, blue is the only hue that works in such a context.

The `modus-themes` will never support `transient-semantic-coloring`.
All relevant faces use the style of standard key bindings.

Themes can enforce user option values, but I have decided to change
the faces instead to better communicate my intent. If a user wants
semantic colouring, they can change the faces to whatever they like.

I understand this is a radical measure, though it is the best I can do
given the circumstances. If `transient.el` where to have accompanying
characters that better denote what each key does (e.g. the plus sign
is for keys that continue the transient), then I am happy to apply
appropriate colours to those and reconsider the aforementioned.


## Semantic mappings for active arguments and values

In various interfaces such as of `eldoc-mode` and `transient.el` there
are highlights for the current argument or argument value. These now
have corresponding semantic palette mappings and are thus styled
uniformly (and can be overridden accordingly). The mappings are:

-   `bg-active-argument`
-   `fg-active-argument`
-   `bg-active-value`
-   `fg-active-value`


## A semantic mapping for formulas in tables

The `prose-table-formula` applies to inline formula expressions in
plain text tables. Org mode uses those, as does the minor mode `orgtbl-mode`.
The inline formula is meant to stand out from the rest of the table,
without exaggerations.


## Matching parentheses have semantic mappings for their foreground too

By default, Emacs will highlight the matching (opening or closing)
delimiter when the cursor is next to it. This is useful in Lisp
programming modes, for example, as we can quickly get a sense of where
an expression starts and ends.

The themes now provide mappings for the foreground of those
delimiters. This means that users can either change the combination of
background and foreground or opt to only display a foreground value
for a more minimal look.

As always, the manual shows concrete examples:
<https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes#h:259cf8f5-48ec-4b13-8a69-5d6387094468>.


## Search highlights have their own semantic mappings

This makes it easier to differentiate their style on a per-theme
basis, which I do for all the Modus themes. It also gives users the
option to override the colours. The mappings:

-   `bg-search-current`
-   `bg-search-lazy`
-   `bg-search-replace`
-   `bg-search-rx-group-0`
-   `bg-search-rx-group-1`
-   `bg-search-rx-group-2`
-   `bg-search-rx-group-3`


## Stylistic tweaks to `modus-operandi-tinted`

The `modus-operandi-theme` uses a light ochre background, which gives
a warmer feel than the pure white background of `modus-operandi`. To
better contribute to this warmth, I made some tweaks to common
elements:

1.  The cursor has a red hue as before, but the value is a bit more
    intense now. This makes it easier to spot in contexts where text is
    already "warm", like close to an Org `TODO` keyword or in
    programming mode comments.

2.  All key bindings have a red hue instead of blue. We can notice the
    effect in Help mode buffers that mention where a command is bound,
    while using `which-key-mode`, in `transient.el` buffers, in
    minibuffer completion annotations, and more.

These are in addition to many nuances already built into `modus-operandi-tinted`.

I hope that existing users will appreciate these tweaks. We anyway
have the option to override any entry in the palette, though I suggest
you give these a chance before enacting any changes.


## Stylistic tweaks to `modus-vivendi-tinted`

Same principle here as with the above set of changes. Namely:

1.  The cursor uses a more intense magenta background to be easier to
    spot.

2.  Key bindings are purple instead of blue to better complement the
    aesthetics of this theme.

3.  The background highlight applied to matching parentheses (per
    `show-paren-mode`) is grey-cyan instead of cyan.

Again, we can override everything but please try those for a little
while.


## The `olivetti-fringe` is visible when needed

This is subject to the user option `olivetty-style`, which can be set
to the value of `fancy` to produce a page-like effect.

Thanks to Dhavan Vaidya and Gautier Ponsinet for bringing this matter
to my attention on the now-discontinued mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/modus-themes/%3Cm2a5qzpi3y.fsf%40muon.local.mail-host-address-is-not-set%3E>


## A more subtle style for the `consult-preview-insertion` face

The default value of that face inherits from the `region` face. This
is fine in some cases, though not when the user calls
`consult-outline` in a buffer with hidden text (e.g. Org folded
headings). There the background is applied to the entire heading's
surface area, which is too distracting while cycling through
completion candidates and inspecting the preview.


## Simpler `imenu-list` with four colours

The `imenu-list` defines two sets of faces which apply to same heading
levels but differ on whether the heading has subheadings or not.
Before, we would colourise those differently, which could be
confusing. Now they look the same, which is fine because the interface
has additional markup to show when subheadings are present.

Thanks to ltmsyvag for pointing this out in issue 95:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/95>.


## Implicit buttons in Gnus are no longer underlined

Gnus buttonises text that it considers actionable. The exact
functionality depends on the context, but it basically does stuff like
add a quick way to write a new message to a given email address. These
buttons can be mistaken for links, so I am removing their underline to
avoid any possible confusion.


## The `message-separator` face is less intense

In message/email composition buffers, there is a line that
distinguishes headers from the body of the message. By default, it
reads `--text follows this line--` and will now have a subtle grey
background. The idea is to not stress the distinction between headers
and body, as this line's verbosity is already enough to call attention
to it when we add a subtle background.


## Recalibrated all "nuanced" background values

Each theme has a subset of slightly accented background named
`bg-{red,green,blue,yellow,magenta,cyan}-nuanced`. These have slightly
different values to be more consistent in terms of their intensity.


## The `debbugs` package is now supported

Thanks to Gautier Ponsinet for sending me the relevant patch to my
personal email. I made further stylistic changes on top.


## The `ztree` package is covered as well

It produces a diff between two directories and thus needs appropriate
colours.


## Added support for `xterm-color` and `rustic-mode`

These are basically reusing styles we already support for other
terminal emulators. Thanks to Tony Zorman for the contribution, which
was done in pull request 99: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/pull/99>.


## Org checkboxes are monospaced when `modus-themes-mixed-fonts` is non-nil

The user option `modus-themes-mixed-fonts` makes specing-sensitive
elements use a monospaced font (specifically, the font family of the
`fixed-pitch` face). This lets the user set a more prose-friendly
style without visually breaking snippets that rely on fixed width
spacing. A prose-friendly style is done by making the default font a
proportionately spaced one, or by enabling `variable-pitch-mode` in
the current buffer.

For this case, we now cover Org checkboxes as well to avoid
misalignments in checklists.

Thanks to Gautier Ponsinet for discussing this with me via email and
sending the relevant patch.


## More code samples in the manual

The manual documents everything about the customisation options
provided by the themes, as well as relevant do-it-yourself code
samples. I now include more examples and better explain how to hook
those either to the `enable-theme-functions` or the
`modus-themes-after-load-theme-hook`. If something is not clear or not
covered at all, please let me know and I will help you do what you
want.


## Miscellaneous

-   All `cl-` snippets are removed from the source code. We did not
    really need them and I rewrote the code accordingly. This is not a
    value judgement against Common Lisp patterns in Emacs Lisp (I do not
    mind them): it is just a matter of removing a dependency for things
    that can easily be done differently.

-   The `keycast-key` inherits the `bold` face if the user option
    `modus-themes-bold-constructs` is set to a non-nil value.

-   The `read-multiple-choice-face` now has a cooler hue than the one it
    had before. This way it is not mistaken for a warning.

-   The `appt-notification` face uses a foreground value that is better
    suited for the modeline, where this indicator appears.

-   The `header-line-highlight` draws a box around it. This makes the
    mouse hover effect easier to spot.

-   The `shr-mark` face is now covered as well. It uses an appropriate
    background colour.

-   The `mct-highlight-candidate` face is covered and has an appropriate
    style for the minibuffer completions.

-   The `completions-highlight` face (Emacs 29) is also supported to
    ensure stylistic consistency between the minibuffer interfaces
    covered by the themes.

-   Flagged and deleted messages in `mu4e` and `notmuch` use different
    hues to not conflate the two.

-   Fixed the spelling of "colour" to "color" in the manual because core
    Emacs uses the latter...
