---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.7.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` are a collection of light and dark themes for GNU
Emacs that provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for users
who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes` (also
designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

This version contains minor refinements for many of the themes in the
collection. It also introduces two new themes which, according to
private feedback I have received, are already well received.


## Experience the `ef-dream` and `ef-reverie` themes

Both themes revolve around the use of gold tones and subtle
complementary colours.

I announced them here: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-04-09-emacs-ef-dream-reverie-themes/>.

The `ef-themes` now cover a wide range of tastes, all while conforming
with a high legibility standard (minimum WCAG AA, though many qualify
for WCAG AAA).


## Refinements for some themes

These are small changes that improve the consistency of the given
theme.


### ef-bio

The `preprocessor` semantic palette mapping uses a cyan-green colour
instead of a vibrant green. This is to better differentiate elements
in code, while remaining faithful to the style of the theme.


### ef-cyprus

The `preprocessor` semantic palette mapping is redefined from a faint
yellow to a firebrick red. This is to ensure that the various
combinations of elements in code are easy to tell apart while
remaining pleasant to look at.


### ef-day

The `green-faint` value has reduced contribution from the blue channel
of light, making it more green-yellow as a result. This colour is only
used for comments: it achieves the two-fold goal of (i) applying
subtle colouration to comments while (ii) making them sufficiently
distinct from their context.


### ef-dark

The value of the `preprocessor` is a bit darker red than its former
brighter variant. This is to improve the visuals in files that include
a high concentration of preprocessor constructs.


### ef-duo-light

-   The `cyan-warmer` entry in the palette is a bit less blue and more
    green. The change is imperceptible on its own (from `#3f6faf` to
    `#3f70a0`). The effect is more noticeable in the context of other
    constructs, such as in an Org document that combines headings of
    varying levels, with code and verbatim inline elements, as well as
    links.

-   The `comment` semantic palette mapping uses a slightly more orange
    value. This is done for stylistic consistency with the rest of the
    theme, while making comments a bit easier to spot.


### ef-duo-dark

As with its light counterpart, the `comment` entry in the palette uses
a slightly different colour value. The effect is subtle and only
appreciated in context.


### ef-frost

The `yellow-faint` palette entry is considerably more yellow than its
previous value. The reason for this change is to make comments and
tags in Org headings stand out more when compared to some other subtle
elements. The exact value of this yellow still feels ice-cold, like
the rest of the theme.


### ef-kassio

The `comment` semantic palette mapping uses a slightly more cyan
value. Comments are easier to tell apart from their context, while
retaining the spirit of their original design.


### ef-light

-   The `blue` entry in the palette is darker than before. This makes
    the links it is applied to easier to spot in their context.

-   The `blue-faint` is a bit less purple/indigo than before. It is now
    applied to level 1 headings (such as in Org) instead of the previous
    `blue` value. Combined with the above it makes it easier to
    differentiate various elements that are rendered in some shade of
    blue (like Org verbatim and links).

-   The `preprocessor` semantic palette mapping uses a slightly darker
    red than before, to better fit in with the rest of the theme.


### ef-melissa-light

The `red-warmer`, `red-cooler`, and `yellow` palette entries are
revised in concert to (i) retain the overall balance of the theme
while (ii) making those colours easier to tell apart.


### ef-rosa

-   Links use a different shade of green. It makes for a slightly better
    fit in the context of other elements.

-   The `green` value is less saturated. It better complements the
    colours it is combined with, such as pink and magenta.

-   The `mail-subject` semantic palette mapping uses the aforementioned
    `green`, as it makes for a better fit in that context.

-   The `comment` semantic palette mapping has a faint green value.
    Comments are a bit easier to spot, while they better contribute to
    the aesthetics of the theme.


### ef-summer

The `preprocessor` semantic palette mapping has a shade of green that
has greater contribution from the blue channel of light. The first
impression is the same as before, though the exact value is a better
fit for the theme.


### ef-symbiosis

The `preprocessor` semantic palette mapping is less intense than
before to make sure there is no impression of exaggeration when there
is a high concentration of it on the screen.


## All light themes use slightly different graph colours

This is a subset of the palette that is used in some special cases
such as the `org-habit` consistency graph. The change covers the
lighter green and blue values, which are now easier to spot in their
context.


## The `doom-modeline` no longer uses `bold-italic`

There were two instances where the `bold-italic` face was applied.
This could break icons, by clipping their top. We revert to only using
the `bold` face.

Thanks to Filippo Argiolas for bringing this matter to my attention in
issue 42: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/issues/42>.
