---
title: 'Emacs: modus-themes version 4.5.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my highly accessible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

I just published the latest stable release of [the Modus
themes](https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes).  The change log
entry is reproduced further below.  For any questions, feel welcome to
[contact me](https://protesilaos.com/contact/).

I will soon install the changes in emacs.git so please wait a little
longer for the updates to trickle down to you.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `modus-themes` (also built into Emacs 28+)
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-changelog>
+ Colour palette: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-colors>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/modus-themes-pictures>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/modus-themes>
+ Backronym: My Old Display Unexpectedly Sharpened ... themes.

* * *

## 4.5.0 on 2024-08-21

The themes are in a stable state. They cover a wide range of packages
and interfaces, while they are highly configurable. The present
version provides further scope for customisation as well as some
quality-of-life refinements.


### Users can now extend the palette of each/all themes

In addition to palette overrides, users can now define extensions for
the palette of each theme or for all themes. The idea is to define new
colours while keeping the existing ones intact. Then, those colours
can be accessed in all the usual ways via (i) the
`modus-themes-with-colors` macro, (ii) the function
`modus-themes-get-color-value`, and (iii) in the palette override user
options.

I wrote about this on my website: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-06-25-emacs-modus-themes-user-palette/>.

And, as always, the manual is the up-to-date reference for everything
you need.

The relevant user options are the following:

-   `modus-themes-common-palette-user`
-   `modus-operandi-palette-user`
-   `modus-operandi-tinted-palette-user`
-   `modus-operandi-deuteranopia-palette-user`
-   `modus-operandi-tritanopia-palette-user`
-   `modus-vivendi-palette-user`
-   `modus-vivendi-tinted-palette-user`
-   `modus-vivendi-deuteranopia-palette-user`
-   `modus-vivendi-tritanopia-palette-user`


### More colours to chose from in customisations

A big part of the themes' customisability is the palette overrides
users can implement. The manual covers lots of examples. The short
version is that the user can change how, say, the mode lines look,
what an Org heading looks like, and so on.

We now have a new pair of background and foreground colours, namely,
`bg-clay` and `fg-clay`, as well as foreground values to complement
their already existing background counterparts: `fg-ochre`,
`fg-lavender`, `fg-sage`.


### "Graph" colours look a bit better in context

Each theme's palette contains a subset of colour values that are
intended for use in graphs. One well-known package where those are
applied is the `org-habit` consistency block.

I tweak a few colours in this subset to make them look better
side-by-side as well as in other combinations. This concerns all the
light themes.


### The indicator for minibuffer recursion has a different style

This concerns the number shown next to the minibuffer prompt while in
a recursive minibuffer (per `minibuffer-depth-indicate-mode` and
related settings to enable minibuffer recursion). Before, the style
was like a mouse highlight, which could be confusing in certain
situations. Now it is an unambiguous coloured background that still
stands out nicely.


### The `kmacro-menu` faces are also supported

These are the marks we see while using the interface provided by the
built-in command `kmacro-menu` (alias `list-keyboard-macros`).


### The `vtable` will respect the user choice for "mixed fonts"

The `vtable` face will be rendered in a monospaced font (technically,
it will inherit `fixed-pitch`) if the user sets the user option
`modus-themes-mixed-fonts` to a non-nil value. Users may want to do
this to eventually apply a proportionately spaced font for regular
prose while keeping spacing-sensitive elements like blocks and tables
in a monospaced view.

[ The manual shows how to configure the individual font families via
  their respective faces. ]

Thanks to shipmints for bringing this matter to my attention in issue
110: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/110>.


### The `jabber` package is now supported

Thanks to Thanos Apollo for the contribution. The change is within
the accepted line limit, meaning that Thanos does not need to assign
copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


### The `doom-modeline` no longer uses `bold-italic`

This style was used to highlight some forms of emphasis, but it turns
out that it can clip the outline of icon fonts (per the `nerd-fonts`
package) under some situations.


### Covered the built-in `window-tool-bar-mode`

Thanks to Jared Finder for the contribution. The change is small,
meaning that Jared does not need to assign copyright to the Free
Software Foundation.


### Miscellaneous

-   The `elisp-shorthand-font-lock-face` is now easier to spot in
    context. This is a way for Emacs packages to define so-called
    "shorthands" of short prefixes in symbols that are aliases for
    longer ones. These shorthands will now use a style that is not found
    anywhere else in Elisp code, making them stand out more.

-   Added partial support for the built-in `viper` package. NOTE though
    that this package is applying colors to cursors in a way that themes
    cannot override. The issue is especially problematic when switching
    themes. If anyone is using Viper and interested to modernise it, let
    me know about your work and then I will update the themes
    accordingly. Thanks to ZharMeny for asking me to support Viper in
    issue 115: <https://github.com/protesilaos/modus-themes/issues/115>.

-   Fixed the symbol of an inherited face in `web-mode`. Thanks to Pavel
    Novichkov for the change. It does not require copyright assignment.

-   Updated the manual to cover the aforementioned.
