---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 3.0.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 3.0.0 on 2024-06-30

This major release comes about two years after the first version of
Denote, which was published on 2022-06-27. A lot of technicalities
have changed in the meantime, though the core idea remains the same.
In fact, the original video presentation I did is still relevant,
especially for those looking to get started with Denote (but remember
to consult the latest documentation for up-to-date information&#x2014;and
ask me if you have any questions).

Version 3 iterates on refinements that we made over the life cycle of
version 2. Existing users will find that their workflow remains the
same, though they now have even more options at their disposal.

As usual, my release notes are detailed. Please take your time to read
them: they are here for you.

Special thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay, a long-time contributor to
the project, for working on some of the items covered herein. I am not
covering everything, as many important changes are not user-facing.
Please consult the Git log for further details.


### File name components can be written in any order

[ Relevant blog post: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-05-19-emacs-denote-reorder-file-name-components/>.]

Users can now change the variable `denote-file-name-components-order`
to affect how Denote file names are constructed. By default, file
names are written using this scheme (consult the manual for the
details):

    IDENTIFIER--TITLE__KEYWORDS.EXT

An optional `SIGNATURE` field can be added, thus:

    IDENTIFIER==SIGNATURE--TITLE__KEYWORDS.EXT

By modifying the `denote-file-name-components-order`, users can
produce file names like these:

    --TITLE__KEYWORDS@@IDENTIFIER.EXT
    __SIGNATURE--TITLE__KEYWORDS@@IDENTIFIER.EXT
    __SIGNATURE--TITLE@@IDENTIFIER__KEYWORDS.EXT

Note that when the `DATE` is not the first component, it gets the `@@`
prefix to (i) remain unambiguous and (ii) make it easy to target it
directly for search purposes.

Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the contribution in pull
request 360: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/360>.

We discussed the possible delimiters for the `IDENTIFIER` in issue
332: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/332>. Thanks to
Jean-Philippe, Nick Bell, Maikol Solis, and mentalisttraceur for their
insights. Our concern was to use characters that are stylistically
fine, while they are not special symbol in regular expressions (as
those make searching a bit less convenient).

Please remember that the file-naming scheme is the cornerstone of
Denote. If you do change how your notes are named, make sure to be
consistent throughout, otherwise you will likely make it harder for
yourself to find what you need.


### Exclude certain files from all prompts

Sometimes users keep files in their `denote-directory` that they do
not want to interactive with. These can, for example, be what Org
produces when exporting to another file format or when archiving a
heading.

The user option `denote-excluded-files-regexp` makes is possible to
omit all those files from the relevant Denote prompts.

This is in response to requests for such a user option done by Samuel
W. Flint and zadca123 in issues 376 and 384, respectively:

-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/376>
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/384>

[ Please let me know if you need this feature but do not know how to
  write a regular expression. I can include concrete examples in the
  manual, though I need to know about them first. ]


### Links in plain text and Markdown files are buttonised differently

Before we were using the function `denote-link-buttonize-buffer`,
which would create &ldquo;buttons&rdquo; for all the `denote:` links it would.
Users probably had something like this in their configuration:

```elisp
;; DEPRECATED method
(add-hook 'text-mode-hook #'denote-link-buttonize-buffer)
```

We now provide an approach that is technically better by using Emacs&rsquo;
fontification mechanism. All the user needs is to add this to their
configuration:

```elisp
(add-hook 'text-mode-hook #'denote-fontify-links-mode-maybe)
```

The notion of &ldquo;maybe&rdquo; in the symbol of that function is because this
will take care to be activated only in the right context.

Thanks to Abdul-Lateef Haji-Ali for the contribution in pull request
344 (further changes by me): <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/344>.

Abdul-Lateef has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


### How to make Org export work in a Denote silo

[ Relevant blog post: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-06-18-emacs-denote-silos-org-export/>. ]

This is not a change in Denote per se, though I have added the
relevant details in the manual. Basically, the Org export machinery
dismisses directory-local variables, thus breaking how Denote silos
work. We can work around this by having an extra `#+bind` directive in
the front matter of each file. The manual, or the aforementioned blog
post, describe the technicalities.


### Org headings can have their own backlinks

[ Relevant blog: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2024-04-21-emacs-denote-heading-backlinks/>. ]

Denote could already link to an Org heading directly. Now it can also
generate a backlinks buffer for the current heading, using the
command `denote-org-extras-backlinks-for-heading`.

This is part of the optional extension `denote-org-extras.el` (it is
part of the Denote package, but not loaded by default if you use
something like `(require 'denote)`).

I am providing this as an option for those who absolutely need it,
though in my opinion it is better to have atomic notes, such that each
file contains information that is relevant as a whole. In this
workflow, individual headings can be added or removed, but the big
picture idea of the file remain intact.

At any rate, this change is possible due to the requisite refactoring
of the code that handles the backlinks. We can technically produce
backlinks to any pattern in files, though this may be more of interest
to developers rather than foreshadow future features in core Denote.


### Finer control over confirmations while renaming

The `denote-rename-no-confirm` is deprecated and superseded by the
more flexible user option `denote-rename-confirmations`.

The command `denote-rename-file` (and others like it) prompts for
confirmation before changing the name of a file and updating its front
matter. The user option `denote-rename-confirmations` controls what
the user is prompted for, if anything. Please consult its
documentation for the technicalities.

Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the contribution in pull
request 324: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/324>.


### The user option `denote-save-buffer-after-creation` is renamed to `denote-save-buffers`

Please update your configuration accordingly, if you were using the
old name.


### The commands `denote-keywords-add` and `denote-keywords-remove` are replaced by `denote-rename-file-keywords`

The new command can add or remove keywords. It does this by
prepopulating the minibuffer prompt with the existing keywords. Users
can then use the `crm-separator` (normally a comma), to write new
keywords or edit what is in the prompt to rewrite them accordingly. An
empty input means to remove all keywords.

[ NOTE: Please check with your minibuffer user interface how to
  provide an empty input. The Emacs default setup accepts the empty
  minibuffer contents as they are, though popular packages like
  `vertico` use the first available completion candidate instead. For
  `vertico`, the user must either move one up to select the prompt and
  then type `RET` there with empty contents, or use the command
  `vertico-exit-input` with empty contents. That Vertico command is
  bound to `M-RET` as of this writing on 2024-06-30 10:37 +0300. ]

Technically, `denote-rename-file-keywords` is a wrapper for
`denote-rename-file`, doing all the things that does.


### The commands `denote-rename-file-title` and `denote-rename-file-signature`

These are like the `denote-rename-file-keywords` we just covered.
There are wrappers of the `denote-rename-file` command, which are used
to change on the file name component they reference.

If that component exists, its text is included in the minibuffer. The
user can then modify it accordingly. If there is no text, the user is
adding a new one. An empty input means to remove the title/signature
from the file altogether (again, check your minibuffer for how to
provide an empty input).


### More commands to add/remove keywords in bulk from Dired

Two new specialised commands are available to help users add or remove
keywords from many files at once. These are:

-   `denote-dired-rename-marked-files-add-keywords`
-   `denote-dired-rename-marked-files-remove-keywords`.

They complement the `denote-dired-rename-marked-files-with-keywords`,
which we have had for a long time already, and which rewrites all the
keywords (instead of only adding/removing from the list).

All three of those commands operate only on the `KEYWORDS` component
of the file name, leaving everything else as-is (while respecting the
aforementioned `denote-file-name-components-order`).

Thanks to Vedang Manerikar for the contribution in pull request 316:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/316>. Vedang has already
assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


### The `denote-org-extras-convert-links-to-file-type` can return relative paths

The previous implementation would always return an absolute file path,
ignoring the Org user option `org-link-file-path-type`. Whereas now it
will return a relative path if that user option is set to a value of
either `'adaptive` or `'relative`.

Thanks to Alexandre Rousseau for the contribution in pull request 325:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/325>. The change is small,
meaning that Alexandre does not need to assign copyright to the Free
Software Foundation.


### For developers or advanced users


#### The `denote-add-prompts` is made public

This is used to `let` bind any additional prompts that should be used
by the `denote` command. Check the source code for how we are using
this function.


#### The `denote-select-linked-file-prompt` is now public

This is used internally but the commands `denote-find-link`,
`denote-find-backlink`. Refer to the implementation of those commands
to get an idea of how to use this prompt.


#### The `denote-retrieve-title-or-filename` is just a wrapper

It simply calls the `denote-retrieve-front-matter-title-value` or
`denote-retrieve-filename-title`. We do not want it to return the
`file-name-base`, as it used to, because this will duplicate the text
of the file name when there is no `TITLE` component, as demonstrated by
duli in issue 347: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/347>.


#### The `denote-file-prompt` is more robust

We have made this function show relative file paths for the
convenience of the user, but we take care to internally return and
store the full file path (which is unambiguous). Thanks to Alan
Schmitt for noting that the history was not working properly. This was
done in issue 339: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/339>.
A series of commits dealt with the implementation details, including a
contribution by Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay in pull request 342:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/342>. Also read 353 for a
further set of tweaks from my side: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/discussions/353>.

As part of these changes, the `denote-file-prompt` now takes a
`NO-REQUIRE-MATCH` argument. It also respects the aforementioned user
option of `denote-excluded-files-regexp`.


#### Relevant functions conform with the `denote-rename-confirmations`

These include the `denote-rename-file-prompt` and
`denote-rewrite-front-matter`, as well as the new
`denote-add-front-matter-prompt`.

This has the meaning of what I mentioned above. Commands that need to
deviate from the user option `denote-rename-confirmations` can `let`
bind it accordingly: we even do this for some commands in `denote.el`,
because certain prompts do not make sense there.


#### All file name components can be `let` bound

We define a new series of variables which can be set to a lexically
scoped value to control what the `denote` function parses. These are:

-   `denote-use-date`
-   `denote-use-directory`
-   `denote-use-file-type`
-   `denote-use-keywords`
-   `denote-use-signature`
-   `denote-use-template`
-   `denote-use-title`

Employ those for custom extensions you may have.

Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for adding those in pull request
365: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/365>.


### Miscellaneous

-   All the Org dynamic blocks defined by Denote in the optional
    `denote-org-extras.el` are now autoloaded. This means that
    evaluating such a code block will work even if the user has not
    explicitly used something like `(require 'denote-org-extras)`.
    Thanks to Julian Hoch for asking for a relevant clarification in
    issue 337: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/337>.
    Thanks to Kolmas for reporting some missing autoloads in issue 371:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/371>.

-   The value of the user option `denote-link-backlinks-display-buffer-action`
    is slightly modified to (i) make the buffer dedicated to its window
    and (ii) try to preserve its size during automatic recombinations of
    the frame&rsquo;s layout.

-   There was a regression in version `2.3.0` relative to `2.2.0` where
    the `denote-link` command would fail in Org capture buffers. Thanks
    to Sven Seebeck for reporting this bug in issue 298:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/298>.

-   The `denote-filetype-heuristics` function no longer chokes if it
    gets a nil value (such as in Org capture buffers).

-   The `denote-journal-extras-directory` (part of the optional
    `denote-journal-extras` file) falls back to `denote-directory` if
    its value is nil. This is what the user option
    `denote-journal-extras-directory` promises in its doc string.

-   All prompts should have their scope of application in all capital
    letters, such as `Select TEMPLATE key`. The idea is to make it
    easier for the user to quickly spot for the prompt is about.

-   The user option `denote-link-description-function` is documented in
    the manual. Thanks to Sven Seebeck for noticing that we did not
    document this for the `2.3.0` release. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné
    Guay for helping me refine the code. This was all done in issue 298:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/298>.

-   As part of internal changes to how our various &ldquo;rename&rdquo; commands
    work, Kolmas reported a regression with wrongly assigned file
    extensions. This was done in issue 343:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/343>.

-   In the `denote-org-extras.el` we now always jump to the correct Org
    heading line, instead of missing it by 1 under certain conditions.
    Thanks to kilesduli for bringing this matter to my attention in
    issue 354: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/354>.


### Policy for the aftermath of this release

The next few days or weeks are reserved for bug fixes. We first want
to make sure that the current code base is rock solid, before making
any further changes. Any bugs will be addressed outright and new point
releases will be published (though those are not accompanied by a
change log entry).


### Git commits

Just an overview of what we did. Thanks again to everyone involved.

    ~/Git/Projects/denote $ git shortlog 2.3.0..3.0.0 --summary --numbered
       169  Protesilaos Stavrou
        52  Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
         3  Al Haji-Ali
         2  Alan Schmitt
         1  Alexandre Rousseau
         1  Jianwei Hou
         1  Vedang Manerikar
