---
title: 'Emacs: pulsar version 1.1.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my pulsar package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Pulsar is a small package that temporarily highlights the current line,
either on demand or automatically after invoking a function that is
present in a user-defined list.  [Watch the
demo](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-14-emacs-pulsar-demo/)

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `pulsar`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/pulsar>
+ Backronym: Pulsar Unquestionably Luminates, Strictly Absent the Radiation.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 1.1.0 on 2024-08-29

This version includes quality-of-life refinements to an already stable
package.


### Function aliases are recognised automatically

Pulsar will produce a highlight on the current line after one of the
functions in `pulsar-pulse-functions` is used. This now works for
aliases of those functions as well, even if they are not explicitly
referenced in `pulsar-pulse-functions`. Whereas before, only the
explicitly named functions would produce the pulse effect.

Thanks to shipmints for the contribution, which was originally done in
in pull request 12 and then refined over a series of commits:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar/pull/12>. The author has
assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

Users who want to opt out of this behaviour, can set the user option
`pulsar-resolve-pulse-function-aliases` to a nil value.


### The `next-multiframe-window` will produce a pulse by default

This command is added to the `pulsar-pulse-functions`. It is
consistent with what we do with the `other-window` command.

Thanks to Maxim Dunaevsky for the contribution. This was done in pull
request 6: <https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar/pull/6>. The change
is small, meaning that Maxim does not need to assign copyright to the
Free Software Foundation.


### More common commands will pulse the current line

I added the following to `pulsar-pulse-functions`:

1.  `evil-goto-first-line`
2.  `evil-goto-line`
3.  `evil-scroll-down`
4.  `evil-scroll-line-to-bottom`
5.  `evil-scroll-line-to-center`
6.  `evil-scroll-line-to-top`
7.  `evil-scroll-up`
8.  `goto-line`
9.  `handle-switch-frame`
10. `logos-backward-page-dwim`
11. `logos-forward-page-dwim`
12. `narrow-to-defun`
13. `narrow-to-page`
14. `narrow-to-region`
15. `widen`

If you are using `setq`, `setopt`, the `:custom` keyword of
`use-package`, or related, make sure to update the value accordingly.
You do not need to do anything if you are doing it with `add-to-list`.


### Pulse a region with `pulsar-pulse-region`

The command `pulsar-pulse-region` pulses the active region. Thanks to
Bahman Movaqar for the contribution. This was done on the
now-deprecated mailing list:
<https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/pulsar/169317951630.22395.14797122445974295748-0@git.sr.ht>

The change is below the ~15 line limit and thus Bahman is not require
to assign copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

I still want to make this work with rectangular regions, which are not
contiguous (in terms of character positions reading from left to
right), but it is tricky. Maybe I will do it for the next version.

Remember that the command `pulsar-highlight-dwim` will apply a
temporary highlight to the active region or the current line. The
highlight is removed as soon as another key is pressed.
