
---
title: 'Emacs: ef-themes version 1.6.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my colourful-yet-legible themes for GNU Emacs.'
---

The `ef-themes` are a collection of light and dark themes for GNU
Emacs that provide colourful ("pretty") yet legible options for users
who want something with a bit more flair than the `modus-themes` (also
designed by me).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `ef-themes`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-changelog>
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/ef-themes-pictures>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/ef-themes>
+ Backronym: Eclectic Fashion in Themes Hides Exaggerated Markings,
  Embellishments, and Sparkles.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

This version adds some minor refinements and extends support for more
packages or faces.


## Support for the built-in ERC feature

The `erc` is one of the IRC clients built into Emacs. The other is
`rcirc`, which the Ef themes have supported for a long time.

All ERC buffers should now be consistent with the themes.

Note that in the interest of simplicity I am not covering the niche
feature of IRC to pass hardcoded colour values to some input. Those
will not be consistent with the themes and it is up to the user to
pick a legible colour combination (or, you know, just keep it simple).


## Better colours for the `ztree` package

With `ztree` the user can check the differences between two
directories. All relevant colour-coding is now consistent with the Ef
themes and will use the palette mappings of the active theme.


## Support for the built-in `window-divider-mode`

This mode controls the style of window dividers. Those now are using a
grey value instead of the one applied to the main foreground. In other
words, they are more subtle.


## The `highlight-indentation` package is covered

Thanks to Oleksii (Alex) Koval for the contribution. This was done in
pull request 38: <https://github.com/protesilaos/ef-themes/pull/38>.
The change is well below the ~15 line limit, meaning that Oleksii does
not need to assign copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


## Some active region background colours are a bit more prominent

The active region background colour of the `ef-autumn`, `ef-night`,
`ef-symbiosis`, and `ef-tritanopia-dark` themes is slightly more
noticeable now. Before is was too subtle and thus hard to spot in some
scenaria.


## An easier to spot magenta value for `ef-tritanopia-dark`

Due to the requirements of blue-yellow colour deficiency (tritanomaly
or tritanopia), this theme uses a more restricted set of colours, with
carefully picked shades of magenta representing a neutral midpoint
between red and cyan. One of the magenta values that was used in many
parts of this theme is now recalibrated to better perform its function
as a third and finer accent in relevant interfaces.


## Refined colours for colour-coded backgrounds in dark themes

In many interfaces the themes apply colour-coded styles to communicate
meaning. For example, in Dired buffers items that are flagged for
deletion have a red background while those that are merely selected
use a green hue (deuteranopia and tritanopia themes have different
colour-coding schemes). In almost all the dark Ef themes, the
applicable values are now slightly more intense to (i) better
complement the foreground they are combined with and (ii) perform
their intended function of providing visual feedback.


## The `gnus-button` face is no longer underlined

This is because it applies in places where an underline is either
misleadingly styled like a link or is the kind of extra emphasis we do
not need (one of my design principles is to avoid exaggerations).


## The `message-separator` has a less intense background

This is about the text found in message/email composition buffers that
separates the headers from the body and by default reads `--text
follows this line--`. Its grey background is more subtle now and
remains easy to spot without being needlessly intense.


## The `org-document-info-keyword` inherits `ef-themes-fixed-pitch`

This means that the text is rendered in a monospaced font if the user
option `ef-themes-mixed-fonts` is set to a non-nil value.


## Semantic mappings for terminals

The Ef themes do not hardcode colour values. Instead, they define
named colours and semantic mappings. The latter are applied to all the
relevant faces. The user can thus override the palette to apply
changes across the supported packages. The manual explains the
technicalities.

To extend this facility, all Ef themes now include semantic mappings
that are used by terminals or anything that reads ANSI escape
sequences. Most users should not have to touch these, but those who
want to do it can either use the `ef-themes-common-palette-overrides`
or the equivalent user option of each individual theme (e.g.
`ef-summer-palette-overrides`).

The commands `ef-themes-preview-colors` and `ef-themes-preview-colors-current`
are relevant to identify the names of the mappings or colours
to-be-overridden.


## The code underpinning the `ef-themes-heading` user option is improved

Thanks to Gautier Ponsinet for porting the implementation from my
`modus-themes` (I thought I had done it long ago). Gautier's
contribution was sent to me as a patch via email.
