---
title: 'Emacs: fontaine version 2.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my fontaine package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Fontaine allows the user to define detailed font configurations and set
them on demand.  For example, one can have a `regular-editing` preset
and another for `presentation-mode` (these are arbitrary, user-defined
symbols): the former uses small fonts which are optimised for writing,
while the latter applies typefaces that are pleasant to read at
comfortable point sizes.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `fontaine`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/fontaine>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/fontaine-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/fontaine>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/fontaine>
+ Mailing list: <https://lists.sr.ht/~protesilaos/fontaine>
+ Backronym: Fonts, Ornaments, and Neat Typography Are Irrelevant in Non-graphical Emacs.

* * *

## Control the fonts of more faces

This version brings a major expansion to the scope of the user option
`fontaine-presets`. It can now control the font family and concomitant
attributes of more Emacs faces. In particular, it covers the following
additional faces:

-   `mode-line-active` and `mode-line-inactive`.
-   `header-line`.
-   `line-number` (from the `display-line-numbers-mode` or its global variant).
-   `tab-bar` (from the `tab-bar-mode`).
-   `tab-line` (from the `tab-line-mode`).

All the supported faces are stored as the value of the variable
`fontaine-faces`. This is the complete list:

-   `default`
-   `fixed-pitch`
-   `fixed-pitch-serif`
-   `variable-pitch`
-   `mode-line-active`
-   `mode-line-inactive`
-   `line-number`
-   `tab-bar`
-   `tab-line`
-   `bold`
-   `italic`

Existing users do not need to update their configuration, as (i) the old
values will still work and (ii) undefined values fall back to reliable
known values.

This change empowers users to further configure their setup, such as:

-   Make the mode lines smaller than the main text.
-   Use a proportionately spaced font for the tabs, while retaining a
    monospaced font for editing.
-   Use a different font family for line numbers to differentiate them
    from the main body of text.

These are some possibilities. Then consider that different presets can
change specify different configurations. For example, a `coding`
preset can be all about small, monospaced fonts, while a `reading`
preset may increase the font sizes and apply proportionately spaced
fonts.

The doc string of `fontaine-presets` covers the technicalities, as
does the official manual (shipped with the package or available on my
website: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/fontaine>).

Thanks to Ashlin Eldridge for suggesting the inclusion of mode line
and line number faces. This was done in issue 4:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/fontaine/issues/4>.


## Use the `fontaine-mode` to persist presets

The new `fontaine-mode` provides a convenience toggle to do the
following:

1.  Store the current Fontaine preset before closing Emacs.
2.  Store the latest preset after using the command `fontaine-set-preset`.
3.  Persist font configurations while changing themes.

The purpose of storing the latest preset is to restore it easily, such
as when starting Emacs. In the manual, we mention this in the sample
configuration:

```elisp
;; Set the last preset or fall back to desired style from `fontaine-presets'
;; (the `regular' in this case).
(fontaine-set-preset (or (fontaine-restore-latest-preset) 'regular))
```

This takes effect while starting up Emacs. So if, say, the user had
selected a `reading` preset with `fontaine-set-preset` and then closed
Emacs while `fontaine-mode` was enabled, the `reading` preset will be
restored on startup.

Thanks to Adam Porter (alphapapa) for suggesting this in issue 2:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/fontaine/issues/2>.

We used to provide code in the sample configuration which was doing
what `fontaine-mode` does, though this is easier to set up (plus it is
a toggle).

## Deprecated the command `fontaine-set-face-font`

This command was used to interactively set the attributes of a face.
It was not consistent with the rest of Fontaine's functionality, plus
it was not faster than setting face attributes directly from Lisp
(such as to test them, while experimenting in the `*scratch*` buffer).


## The `fontaine-set-preset-hook` provides more options

The functions added to this hook are called after `fontaine-set-preset`.
For example, users of my `pulsar` package can highlight the current
line to not lose track of the cursor:

```elisp
(add-hook 'fontaine-set-preset-hook #'pulsar-pulse-line)
```

I had thought about defining what Emacs terms "abnormal hooks", which
are hooks that pass arguments to their functions. This hook would pass
the selected preset, but I ultimately opted for the normal hook that
run their functions without arguments. If advanced users have a good
reason for such a feature, they are welcome to discuss it with me.


## Fontaine now works with Emacs 29+

Emacs 29 is the current stable version and has been out for almost a
year now. I do not have the resources to test/support older versions,
sorry!


## Miscellaneous

-   Updated the manual in light of all the aforementioned.
-   Simplified large parts of the code base.
