---
title: "Prot Asks: Ag about Emacs, Lisps, LLMs, and story-telling"
excerpt: "I talk with Ag Ibragimov about Emacs, Lisp programming, LLMs, social interactions, and the importance of story-telling."
layout: vlog
mediaid: "CoivIaNBbrE"
---

In this ~2.5-hour video, I talk with Ag Ibragimov about Emacs, Lisp
programming, Large Language Models, social interactions and the use of
language, as well as the importance of narratives and story-telling.

Ag shares with me his enthusiasm about all things Emacs, including the
fact that it is a "Lisp machine", so to speak, through which you can
control your computer. We discuss a lot of cases where Ag has
benefited from using Emacs and how it has conditioned him to think of
problems in a certain way.

Ag tells me how he did not have an easy time switching to Emacs. His
back and forth may have been what he needed to develop his current
appreciation for the tool. Talking with him made me feel that he is
enthusiastic about the topic, both technologically and in terms of its
social potential.

Emacs would not be what it is without Emacs Lisp. In this regard, we
comment on Lisp dialects more broadly. Ag tells me about his
experience with Clojure and how he defaults to doing his work in Lisp,
with Emacs at the epicentre.

Throughout our chat, Ag shares his thoughts on the significance of
story-telling. We explore how narratives contribute to our everyday
affairs and even make some comments about how Socrates would relate to
our modern world and our increasing use of LLMs to get things done.

Ag has a pragmatic view of technology in general and of LLMs in
particular. We cover these issues at some length and connect the dots
with everything else.

## Links from Ag Ibragimov

Here's my Emacs config: <https://github.com/agzam/.doom.d>

Some Emacs packages I wrote:

- <https://melpa.org/#/mw-thesaurus> - Merriam-Webster Thesaurus

- <https://melpa.org/#/consult-hn> - Hacker News search with Consult

- <https://melpa.org/#/browser-hist> - Search through the Browser
  history

- <https://github.com/agzam/wiktionary-bro.el> - Lookup Wiktionary
  entries. This one is not published only because I need to finish the
  org-mode branch of it - I need to solve the problem of converting
  html tables with sparse columns and rows to org-mode compatible
  format and there's no good solution for it in elisp.

## About "Prot Asks"

In this new video series, I talk to anybody who is interested to have
a video call with me (so do contact me if you want!). The topics cover
anything related to Emacs, technology, and life in general. More here:
<https://protesilaos.com/prot-asks/>.
