---
title: "Emacs: doric-themes version 0.5.0"
excerpt: "Minimalist themes for GNU Emacs to complement my ef-themes (maximalist) and modus-themes (moderate)."
---

These are my minimalist themes. They use few colours and will appear
mostly monochromatic in many contexts. Styles involve the careful use
of typography, such as italics and bold italics.

If you want maximalist themes in terms of colour, check my `ef-themes`
package. For something in-between, which I would consider the best
"default theme" for a text editor, opt for my `modus-themes`.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `doric-themes`
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/doric-themes-pictures>
+ Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/doric-themes>
+ Backronym: Doric Only Really Intensifies Conservatively ... themes.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Update to doric-themes 0.5.0

### Enjoy the two new members of the collection

These are `doric-siren` and `doric-mermaid`. The former is a light
theme while the latter is dark. Both themes offer a marine vibe
combined with warm hues. Check the updated screenshots of all the
Doric themes: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/doric-themes-pictures>.

### Support for transient.el semantic faces

Those are used when the user option `transient-semantic-coloring` is
set to a non-`nil` value (the default). They are designed to indicate
different types of key, such as those that keep the transient in place
as opposed to exiting it.

The old style of making all key bindings look the same is still
available if `transient-semantic-coloring` is set to `nil`.

### Semantic Emacs Lisp faces

This is a new feature coming in Emacs 31. Users can opt in to it by
setting the user option `elisp-fontify-semantically` to a non-`nil`
value. When active, Emacs Lisp buffers will apply highlights to more
elements of the syntax. Those will still conform with the minimalist
style of the Doric themes, but users at least get the benefits of
`elisp-add-help-echo`.

### Font-lock faces for function calls and use of variables

Those are typically applied by major modes that are power by
tree-sitter. Again, the styles are minimalist.

### More faces or face groups are covered

These include:

- ibuffer's Emacs 31 faces (patched by me in emacs.git)
- flymake's Emacs 31 faces (again, my patch in core)
- diff-hl package
- git-gutter package
- org-habit
- minibuffer-nonselected for Emacs 31
- eglot-highlight-symbol-face
- `ert-test-result-unexpected` and `ert-test-result-expected`,
  courtesy of Rudolf Adamkovič in pull request 19:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/doric-themes/pull/19>.

### Refinements to already supported faces

- The `calendar-today` and `org-date-selected` are similar but
  different enough to stand apart. I initially made them look identical
  because I thought they would never appear in the same context. Thanks
  to Rudolf Adamkovič for telling me they could actually be collocated,
  hence their disambiguation. This was done in issue 20:
  <https://github.com/protesilaos/doric-themes/issues/20>.

- The `transient-argument` and `transient-value` have a background to
  make them easier to spot. This is because they convey information
  about the state of the transient interface, which typically is important.

- Transient's mismatching keys are dimmed out instead of being
  underlined, because this looks better in context.

- Similarly, `org-agenda-clocking` has a more pronounced background.

- Idem for `eldoc-highlight-function-argument` and its counterparts in
  `lsp-mode` and `geiser`.

- The Org check boxes are rendered with a bold weight, while quote
  blocks are in italics. Thanks to Rudolf Adamkovič for the patch in
  pull request 18: <https://github.com/protesilaos/doric-themes/pull/18>.

- All Notmuch cryptography-related faces have more refined styles to
  both stand out better while avoiding exaggerations.

- The Custom user interface buttons inherit from `variable-pitch`.

- The current line number in `display-line-numbers-mode` uses just a
  bold weight to avoid exaggerations.
