---
title: "Emacs: tmr version 1.2.0"
excerpt: "Information about the latest version of my TMR package for GNU Emacs."
---

TMR provides facilities for setting timers using a convenient
notation. Lots of commands are available to operate on timers, while
there also exists a tabulated view to display all timers in a nice
grid.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `tmr`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/tmr>
+ Backronym: TMR May Ring; Timer Must Run.

Below are the release notes.

* * *


## Version 1.2.0 on 2025-10-06

This release introduces several quality-of-life refinements to an
already stable and featureful package.


### Timers can now appear on the modeline

The new minor mode `tmr-mode-line-mode` controls whether running
timers are displayed on the mode line. More specifically, they are
displayed in the `global-mode-string`, which can also be set in the
`tab-bar-mode` (this way the information appears in one place instead
of all the mode lines, assuming default settings).

The exact format of a timer on display is controlled by the user
option `tmr-mode-line-format`. The number of timers is set with the
option `tmr-mode-line-max-timers`. The separator between multiple
timers is `tmr-mode-line-separator`. The length of each timer's
optional description is subject to `tmr-mode-line-max-desc-length`.
While the entire indicator can have a prefix, per `tmr-mode-line-prefix`.

Thanks to Steven Allen for contributing the original version of this
feature in pull request 2: <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr/pull/2>.
Steven has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation. Further
changes by me, such as to make the timers on the mode line clickable
(which produces a tabulated view, per `tmr-tabulated-view`).


### Notifications for more operating systems

Timers can optionally trigger a system notification, via the abnormal
hook `tmr-timer-finished-functions`. The relevant function is
`tmr-notification-notify`. It used to only support Linux. Now it is
extended to handle Android, Windows, and Haiku.

Thanks to Lucas Quintana for the contribution in pull request 10:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr/pull/10>. Lucas has assigned
copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


### The tabulated timers have a "duration" column

The `tmr-tabulated-view` command (alias `tmr-list-timers`) now
includes a "duration" column, in addition to all the other informative
data on display.

[ Remember that the tabulated view can be used to create, duplicate,
  edit, etc. the timers. ]

Thanks to jpg for suggesting this in issue 11:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr/issues/11>.


### Miscellaneous

-   System notifications specify the `:app-icon` of Emacs. It will be
    displayed, if the underlying software supports it (I see it on
    Linux, anyway).

-   The option to play the `tmr-sound-file` via the abnormal hook
    `tmr-timer-finished-functions` is redone to not rely on the system
    shell (implicitly `bash`). This way, users who use exotic shell
    alternatives will not run into any trouble. This is done in response
    to a relevant problem that g-gundam was facing with the `nushell`:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr/pull/7>.

-   The function `tmr-notification-notify` is better at informing the
    user that it has produced the warning about the lack of DBUS
    support. Before, the notification did not identity itself as
    belonging to the `tmr` package.

-   The function `tmr-running-timers-p` is now available as a standalone
    function to do what was done before inside other functions. This is
    useful for anyone writing custom code on top of `tmr`. Thanks to
    Eugene Mikhaylov for suggesting the idea in issue 9:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr/issues/9>.

-   The manual is updated to include whatever necessary from the
    aforementioned.
