---
title: 'Emacs: mct version 1.1.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my mct package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Opinionated changes and enhancements to the default minibuffer
completion UI of Emacs:

- Live completions to update the results as you type.

- Passlist and blocklist of commands or completion categories to
  control whether the `*Completions*` buffer shows up eagerly.

- Other relevant options to control when the `*Completions*` are
  displayed.

- Per command or completion category sorting methods.

- A cleaner `*Completions*` buffer, optionally without a mode line.

- Commands to cycle from the minibuffer to the `*Completions*` and
  vice versa.

In essence, MCT is (i) a layer of interactivity on top of the
out-of-the-box completion experience, and (ii) glue code that
combines built-in functionalities to make the default completion
framework work like that of more featureful third-party options.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `mct`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/mct-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/mct>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2021-10-22-emacs-mct-demo/>
+ Backronym: Minibuffer Confines Transcended; Minibuffer and
  Completions in Tandem.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 1.1.0 on 2025-07-07

This version contains several refinements to an already stable package.


### Sort by command or completion category

The new user option `mct-sort-by-command-or-category` determines how
completion candidates are sorted.

This is an alist where each element is of the form `(SYMBOLS . SORT-FUNCTION)`.

`SYMBOLS` is either a symbol or a list of symbols. `SYMBOLS` can refer
to the symbol of a function or completion category. It can also be `t`,
which refers to the fallback value.

`SORT-FUNCTION` is a function that takes a list of strings and returns a
list of strings, sorting them accordingly.  Examples of a `SORT-FUNCTION`
are:

-   `mct-sort-by-alpha`
-   `mct-sort-by-alpha-then-by-length`
-   `mct-sort-by-history`
-   `mct-sort-by-directory-then-by-file`

To not perform any sorting on the completion candidates that match
`SYMBOLS` set `SORT-FUNCTION` to nil.

If there are conflicting configurations between a `SYMBOLS` function and
completion category, then the function takes precedence (for example
`find-file` is set to sort directories first whereas the `file`
completion category is set to sort by history).


### Optional indicator for `completing-read-multiple`

Users of Emacs prior to version 31 do not have a built-in way to
inform them when they are dealing with a `completing-read-multiple`
minibuffer prompt. Emacs 31 introduces the user option `crm-prompt`
and its related functionality to tell the user what they need to know.

The `mct-completing-read-multiple-indicator` can be used in the
meantime to achieve the same results. It is set to a non-nil value by
default. Opt out by changing it to nil.


### The `*Completions*` are persistent when needed

This concerns the case where a command or completion category is part
of the `mct-completion-passlist` or when the user option
`mct-live-completion` is set to non-nil or `visible`. In such cases,
the completion candidates are on display and we want to keep them
there while performing a dynamic completion, such as with the
`find-file` command ("dynamic" in the sense that it returns a new list
of candidates to match the current path).

Persisting the `*Completions*` means that as we narrow the list, we
still see all the matching results.

In the past, we provided the option `mct-persist-dynamic-completion`
though we do not need it anymore.

I was inspired to make this change in response to a question posed by
Ryan Davis regarding the behaviour of `mct-persist-dynamic-completion`.
This was done in issue 7: <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct/issues/7>.


### Miscellaneous

-   Vertical alignment of the `*Completions*` buffer is more precise.
    Thanks to Jessie Hu for the contribution in pull request 6:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/mct/pull/6>.

-   The command `mct-choose-completion-exit` no longer tries to expand
    further. In the previous implementation it would try to match the
    last known selection from the history when using a file prompt. For
    example we have this workflow:

    -   In the previous prompt we type `/path/to/file/` and exit.
    -   Now we type `/pa`, the completions pop up, we select `/path` and
        invoke `mct-choose-completion-exit`. This wrongly expands into
        `/path/foo/` instead of taking just `/path` (given that it has no
        further input to determine an extension of that string).

    Now the command will do the right thing based on the user's input.
