---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 4.0.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *


## Version 4.0.0 on 2025-04-15

This is a massive release. There is one breaking change, which should
be easy to adapt to: this pertains to the reorganisation of the
project to separate the &ldquo;core&rdquo; of Denote from its &ldquo;extensions&rdquo;. The
core is the `denote` package. Each extension now has its own package
(details below).

Other than that, this version includes lots of new features for
searching and linking as well as quality-of-life refinements. We have
generalised the infrastructure for performing queries in the
`denote-directory` and made the buffers with the search results more
useful.

Take your time to read through this publication. I am writing it for
you. Also remember that the most up-to-date resource for anything
related to Denote is its manual. You are always welcome to contact me:
<https://protesilaos.com/contact>. Or join the development on the Git
repository.

As usual, special thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for making high
quality contributions to Denote since the beginning of the project ~3
years ago. Those will not always be headline features, but are
important improvements to the underlying code base.

I mention contributions from Jean-Philippe and others in its context.
Though I do not cover implementation details, otherwise this document
will be the size of a book. This does not mean that they are no
important though. Please consult the Git commit log for all the
technicalities.


### All the &ldquo;extras&rdquo; are in separate packages, including the Org dynamic blocks

In previous versions of Denote, we included some optional extensions
as part of the `denote` package. These included the files
`denote-org-extras.el` (Org dynamic blocks, among others),
`denote-journal-extras.el` (streamlined for journaling),
`denote-silo-extras.el` (working with multiple Denote silos).

The files `denote-md-extras.el` (Markdown extras) and
`denote-sequence.el` (sequence notes, including Luhmann-style
alphanumeric sequences) were also part of the project during the last
development cycle, though they never made it into a tagged release.

All these are now available as standalone packages on the official GNU
ELPA archive:

-   **`denote-org`:** In the Emacs configuration file, replace all
    instances of `denote-org-extras` with `denote-org`.

-   **`denote-journal`:** Replace `denote-journal-extras` with `denote-journal`.

-   **`denote-silo`:** Replace `denote-silo-extras` with `denote-silo`.

-   **`denote-markdown` :** Replace `denote-md-extras` with `denote-markdown`.

-   **`denote-sequence`:** No changes to any of the defined symbols.
    Simply get the new package.

I will document each of these packages further below. The plan, going
forward, is to maintain all the packages and coordinate their new
versions.


### More things in &ldquo;core&rdquo;

While the extras are moved out to their own code repositories, all
other features are merged into `denote.el`. Those include everything
that was in `denote-sort.el` and `denote-rename-buffer.el`.

-   The &ldquo;sort&rdquo; mechanism is mostly for package developers. We use it
    extensively in our Org dynamic blocks, which are now part of the
    `denote-org` package.

-   The `denote-dired` command (alias `denote-sort-dired`) is the only
    user-facing &ldquo;sort&rdquo; command we have always provided. It produces a
    fully fledged Dired buffer showing the results of the given search
    for file names. The matching files are sorted according to the
    user&rsquo;s expressed preference. The details are described in the
    manual.

-   The `denote-rename-buffer-mode` and all of its user options are
    unchanged. This mode automatically renames the buffer of a given
    Denote file so that it is easier to read it. Again, the manual
    covers the technicalities.

Users do not need to make changes, unless they are explicitly loading
`denote-sort-dired` and `denote-rename-buffer`. In that case, they may
just remove those calls: only `denote` needs to be loaded.


### The `denote-query-mode`

Many of the features I will describe below produce search results via
the built-in Xref mechanism. Xref performs a search with a Grep or
Grep-like program, subject to the user option `xref-search-program`.
The buffer those search results are displayed in runs the
`denote-query-mode`. It supersedes `denote-backlinks-mode`.

The `denote-query-mode` supports the following:

-   Results are shown in the context, with the exact match in highlight.
-   Matches are grouped by file. Each file is a &ldquo;heading&rdquo;.
-   Headings can be folded with `TAB`, just how it is done in Org buffers.
-   The results can be used for further queries. Type `C-h m`
    (`describe-mode`) to learn about all the relevant commands.

We have had support for Xref since the original version of Denote. It
now is more generalised to cover backlinks, query links, and
`denote-grep` (more below).


### Use query links for file contents or file names

Denote has always provided the option to link directly to a file with
a given name by referencing its identifier. This can be done with the
command `denote-link`, among a few others like it (always consult the
manual of Denote).

In addition to these &ldquo;direct links&rdquo;, we also support &ldquo;query links&rdquo;.
Those do not point to a file but instead trigger a search. The results
are placed in a buffer that uses the appropriate major mode.

There are two types of query links:

-   **Query file contents:** Use the command `denote-query-contents-link`
    to insert a query link at point for &ldquo;file contents&rdquo;. It perform a
    search inside files in the `denote-directory` and put the results in
    a `denote-query-mode` buffer.

-   **Query file names:** Use the `denote-query-filenames-link` to insert
    a query link for &ldquo;file names&rdquo;. It performs the query against file
    names (not contents!) and puts the results in a `dired` buffer.

The display of the buffer with the query link results is controlled by
the user option `denote-query-links-display-buffer-action`.

Query links are styled a little bit differently than direct links.
Compare the `denote-faces-link` with `denote-faces-query-link`. Both
should look okay with most themes.

Denote query links are supported as part of the `denote:` hyperlink
type. They are available in all file types we define (per the user
option `denote-file-type`) and should, in principle, work in any
custom file type (advanced users can check the variable `denote-file-types`).


### Backlinks now always show their context

In the past, the command `denote-backlinks` would produce a bespoke
buffer showing a list of file names that included links to the current
file (any file with the Denote file-naming scheme can have backlinks,
by the way, including PDFs, videos, etc.). This buffer did not provide
any additional functionality. We used to support the option to show
results in their context via `denote-backlinks-show-context`. Those
would be rendered in a standard Xref buffer.

The contextual results are now the default and sole option. This is
because we have expanded the functionality of those buffers to use the
`denote-query-mode`, as explained above. Plus, it makes our code base
simpler.

Users will notice how backlikns look just like a query link for file
contents. This is because backlinks are the original query links since
day one of Denote.


### Direct links to a file with matching contents

The command `denote-link-to-file-with-contents` allows users to
produce a direct link to a file whose contents (not file name!)
includes the given query.

Similarly, the command `denote-link-to-all-files-with-contents`
generates a typographic list (bullet list) to all files whose contents
match the given query.

The manual covers all linking commands in depth.


### The essence of `denote-search` is part of `denote`

The `denote-search` package by Lucas Quintana uses the infrastructure
of Denote to perform searches in file contents. We now provide its
feature set as part of core `denote`.

We decided to do this since query links already introduced all of the
requisite generalisations to `denote-query-mode`.

Users can rely on the commands `denote-grep`, `denote-grep-marked-dired-files`,
and `denote-grep-files-referenced-in-region`.

The placement of these buffers is subject to the user option
`denote-grep-display-buffer-action`.

This functionality was introduced in two pull requests by Lucas
Quintana, 571 and 573, with further changes by me:

-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/571>.
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/573>.

Lucas has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

I think this was a much-needed addition to the core of Denote. It
complements `denote-dired` and query links.


### Formatting of links with `denote-link-description-format`

The old user option `denote-link-description-function` is deprecated
and superseded by the new `denote-link-description-format`. The new
user option still accepts a custom function as its value, so the old
behaviour should be retained.

What the new `denote-link-description-format` supports is an easier
way to customise the description of a link by using format specifiers
for common options. For example, users who only want to see the title
of the linked file can do this:

    (setq denote-link-description-format "%t")

The documentation of this user option covers all the format specifiers
and further details.


### Miscellaneous changes for all users

-   The command `denote-add-front-matter` is superseded by
    `denote-rename-file` and related. Those renaming commands will add
    missing front matter or rewrite the modified lines of existing front
    matter. This is due to refinements made by Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
    to the file renaming mechanism. We discussed this deprecation in
    issue 498: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/498>. Also
    thanks to Samuel Flint for reporting an earlier problem with file
    name signatures: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/492>.

-   The user option `denote-open-link-function` specifies the function
    used by Denote to open the file of a direct link.

-   The user option `denote-org-store-link-to-heading` can now be set to
    form generic context links without a `PROPERTIES` drawer and
    corresponding `CUSTOM_ID`. Set the value of this variable to
    `'context`. Read its documentation for further details.

-   Also about `denote-org-store-link-to-heading`, we have changed its
    default value to `nil`, which is what we were doing for most of
    Denote&rsquo;s history. This means that, by default, `org-store-link` and
    anything building on top of it will create a link only to the
    current Denote file, like `denote:IDENTIFIER`, but not to the
    current heading within that file. To create links to the
    file+heading, set the value of this variable to `'id`.

-   The command `denote-dired-link-marked-notes` is an alias for
    `denote-link-dired-marked-notes`.

-   The user option `denote-sort-dired-extra-prompts` control what
    `denote-dired` (alias `denote-sort-dired`) prompts for. It accepts
    either a nil value or a list of symbols among `sort-by-component`,
    `reverse-sort`, and `exclude-regexp`. The order those symbols appear
    in the list is significant, with the leftmost coming first.

-   There is a new `denote-sort-identifier-comparison-function` variable
    which determines how identifier-based sorting should be done by
    default. It complements the existing `denote-sort-title-comparison-function`,
    `denote-sort-keywords-comparison-function`, `denote-sort-signature-comparison-function`.
    Thanks to Maikol Solís for the contribution in pull request 517:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/517>. The change is
    small, meaning that Maikol does not need to assign copyright to the
    Free Software Foundation (though I believe the paperwork is done, anyway).

-   Lots of refinements to the doc strings of individual variables
    and/or functions as well as the manual.

-   Lots of other contributions to discussions and questions on the Git
    repository. Granted, these are not &ldquo;changes&rdquo; per se but are part of
    the development effort nonetheless.

-   Made `denote-get-path-by-id` use `denote-get-file-extension-sans-encryption`
    instead of `denote-get-file-extension`. This fixes a bug where the
    extension is duplicated if it has an encryption component. Thanks to
    eum3l for the patch in pull request 562: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/562>.
    The change is small, meaning that the author does not need to assign
    copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Same as above for `denote--rename-file`, which was done in pull
    request 557: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/557>.


### For developers or advanced users

The following have been added or modified.

-   **NEW Function `denote-file-has-denoted-filename-p`:** Return non-nil
    if `FILE` respects the file-naming scheme of Denote. This tests the
    rules of Denote&rsquo;s file-naming scheme. Sluggification is ignored. It
    is done by removing all file name components and validating what
    remains. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the pull request
    515: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/515>.

-   **NEW Functions `denote-infer-keywords-from-files`:** Return list of
    keywords in `denote-directory-files`. With optional
    `FILES-MATCHING-REGEXP`, only extract keywords from the matching
    files. Otherwise, do it for all files. Keep any duplicates. Users
    who do not want duplicates should refer to the functions
    `denote-keywords`.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-keywords`:** Returns an appropriate list
    of keyword candidates, while accounting for the value of the user
    option `denote-infer-keywords`. It now also accepts the optional
    `FILES-MATCHING-REGEXP` parameter.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-directory-files`:** Returns a list of
    absolute file paths in variable `denote-directory`. It now accepts
    the optional `EXCLUDE-REGEXP` parameter.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-format-file-name`:** Formats a file name.
    The way it treats its `ID` parameter has changed. Please read its
    doc string. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the pull request
    496: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/496>.

-   **ALIAS Function `denote-retrieve-filename-keywords-as-list`:** This
    is a name that is easier to discover than `denote-extract-keywords-from-path`,
    because of the many other functions with the `denote-retrieve-*` prefix.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-retrieve-filename-identifier`:** Extracts
    the identifier from `FILE` name, if present, else returns nil. To
    create a new one from a date, refer to the `denote-get-identifier`
    function. Thanks to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the pull request
    476: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/476>.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-get-identifier`:** Converts `DATE` into a
    Denote identifier using `denote-id-format`. If `DATE` is nil, it
    returns an empty string as the identifier. Also by Jean-Philippe in
    pull request 476 mentioned right above.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-date-prompt`:** Prompts for a date,
    expecting `YYYY-MM-DD` or that plus `HH:MM` (or even `HH:MM:SS`).
    Can also use Org&rsquo;s more advanced date selection utility if the user
    option `denote-date-prompt-use-org-read-date` is non-nil. It now has
    the optional parameters `INITIAL-DATE` and `PROMPT-TEXT`. Thanks to
    Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the pull request 576:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/576>.

-   **NEW Function `denote-retrieve-groups-xref-query`:** Accesses the
    location of xrefs for `QUERY` and group them per file. Limit the
    search to text files.

-   **NEW Function `denote-retrieve-files-xref-query`:** Returns sorted,
    deduplicated file names with matches for `QUERY` in their contents.
    Limits the search to text files.

-   **NEW Function `denote-retrieve-xref-alist`:** Returns xref alist of
    files with the location of matches for `QUERY`. With optional
    `FILES-MATCHING-REGEXP`, it limits the list of files accordingly
    (per `denote-directory-files`). At all times, it limits the search
    to text files.

-   **NEW Function `denote-prepend-front-matter`:** Prepend front matter
    to `FILE`. The `TITLE`, `KEYWORDS`, `DATE`, `ID`, `SIGNATURE`, and
    `FILE-TYPE` are passed from the renaming command and are used to
    construct a new front matter block if appropriate.

-   **MODIFIED Function `denote-rewrite-front-matter`:** Rewrites front
    matter of note after `denote-rename-file` (or related). The `FILE`,
    `TITLE`, `KEYWORDS`, `SIGNATURE`, `DATE`, `IDENTIFIER`, and
    `FILE-TYPE` arguments are given by the renaming command and are used
    to construct new front matter values if appropriate. If
    `denote-rename-confirmations` contains `rewrite-front-matter`,
    prompt to confirm the rewriting of the front matter. Otherwise
    produce a `y-or-n-p` prompt to that effect. Thanks to
    Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for the pull request 558:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/558>.


### Denote &ldquo;extensions&rdquo; that are not in the `denote` package anymore


#### `denote-journal` integrates nicely with `M-x calendar`

The `calendar` can now highlight days that have journal entry. It may
also be used as a date picker to view or write a journal entry for
that day.

-   Thanks to Alan Schmitt for reporting an issue with the calendar
    integration during development:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-journal/issues/8>.

-   Thanks to Vineet C. Kulkarni for tweaking the identification of the
    journal keyword to be more robust:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-journal/pull/4>.

-   Thanks to Honza Pokorny for fixing two small issues with the path
    expansion:
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-journal/pull/5>
    -   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-journal/pull/7>

Other than that, the package is providing the same functionality as
the discontinued `denote-journal-extras.el`.

-   Manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-journal>.
-   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-journal>.


#### `denote-org` is almost the same as the discontinued `denote-org-extras.el`

The only addition to dynamic blocks the optional `:not-regexp` parameter.
This is a regular expression that can further filter the results of a
search, such that the matching items are removed from the output.

The official manual of `denote-org` covers the technicalities.

-   Manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-org>.
-   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-org>.

Also thanks to Elias Storms for fixing a small issue with the &ldquo;missing
links&rdquo; Org dynamic block, in pull request 486: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/486>


#### `denote-silo` is the same as the discontinued `denote-silo-extras.el`

I have only made small tweaks to it, but nothing that changes the user
experience.

-   Manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-silo>
-   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-silo>


#### `denote-markdown` for some Markdown-specific extras

This package provides some convenience functions to better integrate
Markdown with Denote. This is mostly about converting links from one
type to another so that they can work in different applications
(because Markdown does not have a standardised way to define custom
link types). It also defines an &ldquo;Obsidian&rdquo; file type which does not
have any front matter but only uses a level 1 heading for the title of
the note.

The code of `denote-markdown` used to be bundled up with the `denote`
package before version `4.0.0` of the latter and was available in the
file `denote-md-extras.el`. Users of the old code will need to adapt
their setup to use the `denote-markdown` package. This can be done by
replacing all instances of `denote-md-extras` with `denote-markdown`
across their configuration.

-   Manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-markdown>
-   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-markdown>


#### Write sequence notes (or &ldquo;folgezettel&rdquo;) with `denote-sequence`

Users who want their notes to have an inherent structure can use
`denote-sequence`. The idea is to have thoughts that naturally form
sequences and are named accordingly. The sequence scheme is either
numeric or alphanumeric. The manual of the package explains all the
details.

-   Manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-sequence>
-   GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence>

I had a lot of fun developing this comprehensive package during the
winter holidays.

Thanks to Claudio Migliorelli, Kierin Bell, Mirko Hernandez for
helping me fix some issues during development:

-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/518>.
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/528>.
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/540>.
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/541>.
-   <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence/issues/2>.


### The `consult-denote` also gets a small update

This has always been a standalone package. I made the function
`consult-denote-file-prompt` read the special-purpose variable
`denote-file-prompt-use-files-matching-regexp`. This is related to
commit `e0f1d47` in denote.git, about issue 536 as reported by Alan
Schmitt: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/536>. The
variable `denote-file-prompt-use-files-matching-regexp` is meant to be
`let` bound and is for advanced users or developers.


### Feature freeze at least until the end of April 2025

I will not develop new features or accept pull request for a couple of
weeks. The idea is to focus on fixing any bug reports. We can then
publish point releases quickly.

New features can be included after we are confident that the packages
we have are okay.


### Git commits

This is just an overview of the Git commits, though remember that
there is more that goes into a project, such as the reporting of
inconsistencies, discussion of new ideas, et cetera. Thanks to
everybody involved! Plus, some commits are large while others are
tiny.

    ~/Git/Projects/denote $ git shortlog 3.1.0..4.0.0  --summary --numbered
       470	Protesilaos Stavrou
        90	Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
         6	Kierin Bell
         4	Alan Schmitt
         3	eum3l
         2	Claudio Migliorelli
         2	Lucas Quintana
         2	grtcdr
         1	Elias Storms
         1	Laurent Gatto
         1	Maikol Solís
         1	Octavian
         1	TomoeMami

The following are not accurate because they only reflect the changes
after the reorganisation I made. But we have to start from somewhere.

    ~/Git/Projects/denote-journal $ git shortlog  --summary --numbered
        54	Protesilaos Stavrou
         2	Honza Pokorny
         1	Vineet C. Kulkarni

    ~/Git/Projects/denote-sequence $ git shortlog  --summary --numbered
        22	Protesilaos Stavrou

    ~/Git/Projects/denote-silo $ git shortlog  --summary --numbered
        17	Protesilaos Stavrou

    ~/Git/Projects/denote-org $ git shortlog  --summary --numbered
        15	Protesilaos Stavrou

    ~/Git/Projects/denote-markdown $ git shortlog  --summary --numbered
        11	Protesilaos Stavrou
