---
title: 'Emacs: pulsar version 1.3.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my pulsar package for GNU Emacs.'
---

This is a small Emacs package that automatically highlights the current
line after certain functions are invoked. It can also highlight a line
or region on demand. The idea is to make it easier to find where the
point is, what was affected, and also to bring attention to something
in a buffer. [Watch the original demo](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-03-14-emacs-pulsar-demo/) (2022-03-14).

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `pulsar`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/pulsar-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/pulsar>
+ Backronym: Pulsar Unquestionably Luminates, Strictly Absent the Radiation.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

# Version 1.3.0 on 2025-11-30

This version introduces a new feature and makes small refinements to
an already reliable base.


## Permanent static highlight for a line or region

In the most common use-case, Pulsar produces a highlight that fades in
and out of view after a certain amount of time. The idea with such a
"pulse effect" is to quickly get a sense of where the cursor is when
some change occurs (e.g. switching to another window).

The permanent static highlights differ from pulse effects in two ways:
(i) they do not have a fade-in and fade-out phase and (ii) are not
removed automatically. These highlights stick around either until the
user removes them or their underlying text is deleted. They are meant
to be used as intentional highlights, such as to draw attention to a
certain statement while doing a presentation.

The command `pulsar-highlight-permanently` adds a permanent static
highlight to the current line. When the region is active, the
highlight is applied from the beginning to the end of the region.

The command `pulsar-highlight-permanently-remove` removes permanent
static highlights from the active region or current line. This command
operates on the entire buffer when it is called with a universal
prefix argument (`C-u` by default).

The command `pulsar-highlight-permanently-dwim` adds a permanent
static highlight if there is none or removes it if there is one. It
operates on the currently active region or line at point.

Permanent static highlights are rendered with the face specified in
the user option `pulsar-highlight-face`.


## New name for temporary static highlights

The commands `pulsar-highlight-dwim` and `pulsar-highlight-line` are
obsolete aliases for `pulsar-highlight-temporarily`.

Temporary static highlights do not have a fade-in and fade-out phase.
They are automatically removed as soon as an action occurs. They are
an alternative to the aforementioned permanent static highlights.

The command `pulsar-highlight-temporarily` will operate on the active
region or the current line.


## Miscellaneous

-   Thanks to Koloszár Gergely for reporting an intermediate bug where
    the pulse effect actually did not pulse under certain conditions.
    This was done in issue 31: <https://github.com/protesilaos/pulsar/issues/31>.

-   Parts of the code are rewritten in the interest of clarity.

-   The entire manual is redone to better organise the documentation.
