---
title: "Emacs: tmr version 1.3.0"
excerpt: "Information about the latest version of my TMR package for GNU Emacs."
---

TMR provides facilities for setting timers using a convenient
notation. Lots of commands are available to operate on timers, while
there also exists a tabulated view to display all timers in a nice
grid.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `tmr`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/tmr-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/tmr>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/tmr>
+ Video demonstration: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2026-01-19-emacs-timers-tmr-demo/>
+ Backronym: TMR May Ring; Timer Must Run.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 1.3.0 on 2026-01-25

This version adds some user options and new features to an already
stable package.


### Timers can be paused

The command `tmr-toggle-pause` will prompt for a running timer and
pause it.

Users who have something like the following in their configuration,
have access to `tmr-toggle-pause` under the `P` key:

```elisp
;; All TMR commands are behind this prefix key.  So `tmr-toggle-pause' is C-c t P.
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c t") #'tmr-prefix-map)
```

In the buffer produced by the command `tmr-tabulated-view` the pause
functionality applies to the timer at point. The `tmr-toggle-pause` is
invoked with the `P` key.

An extra column in the tabulated view shows whether a timer is paused
or not. Here is an example:

```
Start      End        Duration   Remaining  Paused?  Acknowledge?   Description

08:49:41   09:19:46   30m        29m 17s    Yes                     Work on TMR for 30 minutes
08:49:31   08:54:31   5m         3m 53s                             Prepare tea
08:49:21   08:59:21   10m        8m 42s              Yes            Edit the description with this one instead
```

### Configure the confirmation text for acknowledgements

When a timer is set to be acknowledged (i.e. the user must confirm
that they saw it elapse) it prompts for confirmation. The default
input text that confirms the acknowledgement is `ack`. This is now
subject to configuration via the user option `tmr-acknowledge-timer-text`.


### Change how frequently the tabulated list is refreshed

The buffer produced by `tmr-tabulated-view` is set to automatically
refresh every 5 seconds by default. In previous versions this was every
1 second. The new user option `tmr-tabulated-refresh-interval` can be
set to a number of seconds or `nil`. In the latter case, the automatic
refresh is disabled.


### Removed the long-obsolete `tmr-tabulated.el`

Its code was merged into `tmr.el` on 2024-10-30 and all it was doing
thenceforth is issue a warning to those who would `require` the
`tmr-tabulated` feature. Now `(require 'tmr-tabulated)` produces an
error.
