---
title: 'Emacs: Lin version 2.0.0'
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my lin package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Lin is a stylistic enhancement for Emacs' built-in `hl-line-mode`.  It
remaps the `hl-line` face (or equivalent) buffer-locally to a style that
is optimal for major modes where line selection is the primary mode of
interaction.

The idea is that `hl-line-mode` cannot work equally well for contexts
with competing priorities: (i) line selection, or (ii) simple line
highlight.  In the former case, the current line needs to be made
prominent because it carries a specific meaning of some significance in
the given context: the user has to select a line.  Whereas in the latter
case, the primary mode of interaction does not revolve around the line
highlight itself: it may be because the focus is on editing text or
reading through the buffer's contents, so the current line highlight is
more of a reminder of the point's location on the vertical axis.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `lin`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/lin-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/lin>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/lin>
+ Backronym: LIN Is Noticeable.

Below are the release notes

* * *

## Version 2.0.0 on 2026-02-12

This is the first tagged release since 2024-08-05. The package is in a
stable state: it does everything it is meant to. This version makes
some small refinements, mostly in how parts of the code are written.
Though there also are some nice user-facing changes:

-   The `lin-gnome-accent-color-mode` synchronises the accent colour of
    the GNOME desktop environment with Lin' own `lin-face`. This happens
    live, so any buffers that are already using the `lin-mode` (directly
    or via `lin-global-mode`) will get the updated colour.

-   The user option `lin-gnome-accent-color-override-foreground`
    controls whether the faces that correspond to GNOME accent colours
    should override the underlying text colour or not. This is useful
    for improved colour contrast. The default is to not override the
    foreground. Setting `lin-gnome-accent-color-override-foreground` to
    non-`nil` changes that so, for example, the `lin-face` will be set
    to `lin-red-override-fg` instead of `lin-red` (of course, faces can
    be modified by users/themes to override the foreground anyway, so
    this is about the default behaviour).

-   New faces to style the current line when `lin-mode` is enabled
    include `lin-purple`, `lin-orange`, and `lin-slate`. Those do not
    override the underlying foreground colours by default. Whereas
    `lin-purple-override-fg`, `lin-orange-override-fg`, and
    `lin-slate-override-fg` apply their background while also setting
    the foreground (remember that you always control which face to use
    by changing the user option `lin-face`).

-   The `lin-global-mode` skips all private buffers. These are buffers
    that users normally do not interact with directly. Their names are
    prefixed with a space and, by default, are hidden from the view of
    `switch-to-buffer` and related commands.

-   The default value of the user option `lin-mode-hooks` now includes
    the `world-clock-mode-hook` and `xref--xref-buffer-mode-hook`. The
    former relates to the command `world-clock`, while the latter is
    used by any command that produces Grep-like results via the built-in
    Xref infrastructure (for example, my Denote package does that for a
    few of its commands). The `lin-mode-hooks` is a list of hooks for
    major modes that should use the Lin style for the selection line
    highlight.
