---
title: "Emacs: doric-themes version 0.6.0"
excerpt: "Minimalist themes for GNU Emacs to complement my ef-themes (maximalist) and modus-themes (moderate)."
---

These are my minimalist themes. They use few colours and will appear
mostly monochromatic in many contexts. Styles involve the careful use
of typography, such as italics and bold italics.

If you want maximalist themes in terms of colour, check my `ef-themes`
package. For something in-between, which I would consider the best
"default theme" for a text editor, opt for my `modus-themes`.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `doric-themes`
+ Sample pictures: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/doric-themes-pictures>
+ Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/doric-themes>
+ Backronym: Doric Only Really Intensifies Conservatively ... themes.

Below are the release notes.

* * *

## Version 0.6.0 on 2026-01-17

This version adds support for more packages, while it revises some of
the faces that were already covered.

### Enhanced completion interface

The minibuffer prompt used by the command `doric-themes-select` now
groups themes by their light or dark type. The current theme is at the
top.

### Avy highlights are easier to spot

The highlights generated by the various commands of the `avy` package
now have a slightly more intense background+foreground colour combination.
It should be easier to spot and to differentiate from other highlights
such as that of `hl-line-mode` and the mouse hover effect over links.

### Support for all the tmr faces

My `tmr` package styles timers in its grid/tabulated interface as well
as on the mode line. All these now get colours that come directly from
the active Doric theme. Before, the colours were defined only in the
`tmr` source code: they were "okay" (because they are based on my
`modus-themes`) but not stylistically optimal.

### Support for `ruler-mode`

The built-in `ruler-mode` draws a ruler at the top of the current
buffer. All of its faces now use appropriate colours.

### Trailing spaces have a more refined colour

All packages that have a face that is about highlighting trailing
spaces now get a red colour value that is more appropriate for each
Doric theme.

### SHR buffers can use proportionately spaced fonts

I removed an override for the built-in `shr-text` face, which was
making the `nov` package display its buffers in a monospaced font.

Thanks to Marcus Kammer for telling that `nov-mode` buffers were not
proportionately spaced by default. This was done in issue 23:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/doric-themes/issues/23>.
