---
title: "Emacs: Denote version 4.2.0"
excerpt: 'Information about the latest version of my Denote package for GNU Emacs.'
---

Denote aims to be a simple-to-use, focused-in-scope, and effective
note-taking and file-naming tool for Emacs.

Denote is based on the idea that files should follow a predictable and
descriptive file-naming scheme.  The file name must offer a clear
indication of what the contents are about, without reference to any
other metadata.  Denote basically streamlines the creation of such
files or file names while providing facilities to link between them
(where those files are editable).

Denote's file-naming scheme is not limited to "notes".  It can be used
for all types of file, including those that are not editable in Emacs,
such as videos.  Naming files in a constistent way makes their
filtering and retrieval considerably easier.  Denote provides relevant
facilities to rename files, regardless of file type.

+ Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote`
+ Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote>
+ Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-changelog>
+ Git repositories:
  + GitHub: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote>
  + GitLab: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote>
+ Video demo: <https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2022-06-18-denote-demo/>
+ Backronyms: Denote Everything Neatly; Omit The Excesses.  Don't Ever
  Note Only The Epiphenomenal.

Below are the release notes.

* * *


## Version 4.2.0 on 2026-05-20

This version brings several improvements to the core `denote` package
as well as all the Denote extensions I maintain. The core package is
stable, its feature set is rich, and the wider ecosystem of extensions
is growing.

Most of the changes documented herein are of interest to experienced
users who may be looking for ways to refine their workflow. I
recommend that new users start with the basics, as I explained them in
the original video demonstration of Denote or as they are documented
in the manual&rsquo;s section for newcomers:

-   **Webpage:** <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote#h:c54bedb4-5377-4dbd-853c-5870ace6eb33>.
-   **Info manual:** With the latest `denote` package installed, evaluate `(info "(denote) Getting started with Denote")`.

Remember that the release notes are true only at the time of
publication. The single source of truth is the official manual.


### Core Denote


#### Overview of the new features

-   The command `denote-dired-focus` will filter the results of an
    existing `denote-dired` buffer. Use this to narrow down the results.

-   In Org files, the `denote:` link type can now be previewed using the
    built-in `org-link-preview` command, starting with Org version
    `9.8.0`.

-   The command `denote-link-or-create-with-command` extends the
    existing convenience functions of the &ldquo;do or create note&rdquo; kind.

-   The `denote-file-prompt` uses completion metadata to sort by most
    recently accessed, group by directory or file extension, and cover
    packages that display cosmetic icons alongside completion
    candidates.

-   Denote now enforces a controlled vocabulary for keywords when
    `denote-infer-keywords` is set to `nil`, such that only the
    `denote-known-keywords` are provided as an option at the relevant
    prompts.

-   The mechanism for integrating Denote with `org-capture` now supports
    prompting for an signature via `denote-org-capture-with-prompts`
    (the signature is an optional, free-form component of the Denote
    file-naming scheme).

-   Several packages that extend Denote are documented in the manual. If
    you have a package for Denote, let me know and I will write a
    section about it.


#### Focus a `denote-dired` buffer with `denote-dired-focus`

The command `denote-dired` produces a Dired listing of file names that
match the given regular expressions. Users can benefit from the Denote
file-naming scheme to, for example, include all files that have the
keyword `_emacs`. In the resulting Dired buffer, the new command
`denote-dired-focus` can then be invoked to further narrow down the
results, such as to only show files that have `2026` in their file
(with default settings, the date is part of the Denote identifier).

I implemented this feature in response to issue 693 by 82Kang:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/693>.


#### Improvements to the file prompt

Various Denote commands prompt for a file name: for instance,
`denote-link` asks which file to link to. This file prompt is now
augmented with completion metadata that transform how files look and
how the information is organised.

Before, the prompt presented full file names like:

    20220610T043241--initial-thoughts-on-the-zettelkasten-method__notetaking.org
    20220610T062201--define-custom-org-hyperlink-type__denote_emacs_package.md
    20220610T162327--on-hierarchy-and-taxis__notetaking_philosophy.txt

Those same file names are now transformed to look like this:

    2022-06-10  initial-thoughts-on-the-zettelkasten-method  notetaking
    2022-06-10  define-custom-org-hyperlink-type  denote_emacs_package
    2022-06-10  on-hierarchy-and-taxis  notetaking_philosophy

The files will be grouped by file extension or directory (if they are
in a subdirectory of the `denote-directory`). Furthermore, they will
be sorted by most recently accessed.

The underlying file names are still available except that their
presentation is modified. This means that input at the minibuffer
prompt will still match everything they contain.

This completion metadata extends to the packages `all-the-icons` and
`nerd-icons`, which are now instructed to add the correct file icons
to the completion candidates: an Org file will have the unicorn icon
beside it, for example.

Users who do not like the new style can revert to the plain
presentation by setting `denote-file-prompt-extra-metadata` to `nil`.

Advanced users who wish to set up the `completion-category-overrides`
may target the `denote-file` completion category or, anyhow, modify
the `denote-file-prompt-extra-metadata`.


#### Link to a file or create a new note using a specific command

Denote provides many &ldquo;convenience wrapper&rdquo; commands that do something
quickly which can also be achieved with minimal configuration. For
example, the `denote` command may be modified to also prompt for a
file type and so the `denote-type` command is like `denote` with the
addition of the file type prompt. Users can look at the source code of
`denote-type` to write their own small variations (the manual provides
several examples as well).

The `denote-open-or-create-with-command` may then use those to
implement its specified behaviour of &ldquo;open an existing file or create
it using a convenience wrapper command&rdquo;.

Same principle for the new `denote-link-or-create-with-command`: it
makes possible the workflow of &ldquo;link to an existing file or create a
new note with the given command&rdquo;.

Convenience wrappers are listed in the value of the user option
`denote-commands-for-new-notes`.

Thanks to Matthew Batson for building on top of existing functionality
to contribute `denote-link-or-create-with-command` in pull request
674: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/674>. Matthew has
assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


#### Preview `denote:` links in Org files

Starting with Org version `9.8.0` custom link types such as `denote:`
can implement their own preview mechanism. In practice, this means
that `denote:` links pointing to image files will now work as expected
with `org-link-preview` (remember that the Denote file-naming scheme
can be applied to any file and is in no way specific to
note-taking&mdash;I use it for documents and videos, for example).

Thanks to Samuel W. Flint for the original contribution in pull request 683:
<https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/683>, with further changes
by me. The original contribution is small, meaning that Samuel does
not need to assign copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


#### Signature support in Org capture

The `denote-org-capture-with-prompts` function now supports the
signature file name component as an additional parameter. This
function is meant to be used in tandem with the `org-capture`
mechanism, as shown in the manual.

Thanks to Tobias Lidman-Strauss for the contribution in merge request
2 on the GitLab mirror: <https://gitlab.com/protesilaos/denote/-/merge_requests/2>.
The change is small, meaning that Tobias does not need to assign
copyright to the Free Software Foundation.


#### The `denote-fontify-links-mode` is only relevant for `.txt` files

The `denote:` links are automatically highlighted as links in Org and
Markdown bufers. Users who prefer to write notes in plain `.txt` files
must enable the `denote-fontify-links-mode` to get the same effect.

I have revised `denote-fontify-links-mode` to only work with `.txt` as
its other users were not necessary. In the process, I have deprecated
the `denote-fontify-links-mode-maybe` function: just use the `denote-fonftify-links-mode`.

The keys `RET` and `C-c C-o` open the link (same keys used by Org and
Markdown modes).


#### Growing ecosystem of Denote packages

In the Denote manual I mention packages that build on top of Denote.
There is one section for each package. The manual now includes the
following:

-   **`denote-agenda` (by Samuel W. Flint):** Use Denote notes as Org agenda files.
-   **`denote-journal-capture` (by Samuel W. Flint):** Enhanced journaling workflows.
-   **`denote-lint` (Peter Smith):** Checks for inconsistencies in Denote file names and front matter.
-   **`denote-project-notes` (by Samuel W. Flint):** Integrate Denote with Emacs&rsquo; built-in project support.
-   **`denote-regexp` (by Samuel W. Flint):** Search and link notes using regular expressions.
-   **`denote-review` (by Matto Fransen):** A package for reviewing notes over time.
-   **`denote-sections` (by Samuel W. Flint):** Manage sections within Denote notes.
-   **`denote-wordcloud` (by Alexander Kuzmin):** Generate word clouds from Denote notes.


#### Miscellaneous

-   The command `denote-dired` (alias `denote-sort-dired`) is refactored
    to work as intended in all cases. Thanks to kilesduli for the
    contribution in pull request 666: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/666>.
    Further changes by me, including the option to maintain many
    separate `denote-dired` buffers, which I did in response to issue
    693 by 82Kang: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/693>.

-   I have revised the `denote-grep` mechanism and all of its ancillary
    functions and variables are revised in the interest of consistency
    and maintainability. Thanks to gnuhack for contributing a macro that
    was meant to streamline some commands. This was done in pull request
    697: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/697>. I eventually
    changed lots of things so that the macro was not relevant anymore,
    though mine was a change with a wider scope.

-   The Org link storage mechanism (`denote-link-ol-store`) now works
    correctly within `org-capture` buffers, allowing for more flexible
    linking workflows.

-   Following non-Denote Markdown links no longer result in an error
    under certain circumstances. Thanks to bplubell for the contribution
    in pull request 685: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/685>.
    The change is small, meaning that its author does not need to assign
    copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Retrieving front matter is now more reliable, even when the buffer
    is unsaved. Thanks to kilesduli for the contribution in pull request
    672: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/672>. Also thanks
    to Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay for reviewing the change and for
    reporting a problem with an earlier version of the code in issue
    670: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/670>. Further
    changes by me.

-   The various Denote rename commands that affect the front matter in
    files no longer change existing spacing. I did this to address the
    comment posted by Morten Kjeldgaard in issue 703: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/703>.

-   Updated the documentation to explain how to automatically encrypt
    new notes when using a custom file type.

-   Refined the internal helper functions for directory management and
    identifier validation.

-   Thanks to nescias for fixing three typos in the manual. This was
    sent to me as a patch, which I installed as commit `c772378`.


#### Changes to the extensions of Denote I maintain

This is about packages I maintain. Some of them were originally part
of the denote.git repository, but I moved them out into their own
packages to make everything easier to reason about.


##### `consult-denote` version 0.5.0

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `consult-denote`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/consult-denote>
-   Change log: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/consult-denote-changelog>
-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/consult-denote>
-   Backronym: Consult-Orchestrated Navigation and Selection of
    Unambiguous Targets&hellip;denote.

-   References to the long-obsolete &ldquo;denote-silo-extras-&rdquo; prefix are
    replaced by &ldquo;denote-silo-&rdquo;. Thanks to IT Ascalium for the
    contribution in pull request 20: <https://github.com/protesilaos/consult-denote/pull/20>.
    The change is small, so its author does not need to assign copyright
    to the Free Software Foundation.

-   The `consult-denote-file-prompt` correctly handles relative file
    paths when `denote-directory` is set to a list of directories. This
    is what the underlying `denote-file-prompt` does (which I mentioned
    above about its metadata). Thanks to Kai von Fintel for the
    contribution in pull request 24: <https://github.com/protesilaos/consult-denote/pull/24>.
    The change does not require copyright assignment.


##### `denote-merge` version 0.1.0

-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-merge>
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-merge>
-   Backronym: Denote&hellip; Merging Eventually Reformats the Given Entries.

This is an optional extension to the `denote` package. It provides
commands and relevant user options to streamline the work of merging
contents from one Denote file to another. This is for users who
periodically review their notes to add, remove, or otherwise
consolidate their accumulated knowledge.


##### `denote-journal` version 0.3.0

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote-journal`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-journal>
-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-journal>
-   Backronym: Denote&hellip; Journaling Obviously Utilises Reasonableness
    Notwithstanding Affectionate Longing.

-   The user option `denote-journal-keyword` now supports a `nil` value,
    allowing users to create journal entries without a specific keyword.
    Thanks to nescias for sending me the patch via email, which I
    installed as commit `d4cc501` in denote-journal.git. The change does
    not require copyright assignment.

-   Fixed an issue about how the function `denote-directory-files` was
    used. Thanks to Donald Brady for reporting the bug in issue 656 on
    the main Denote repository and to kamchy for confirming the problem:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/issues/656>. The approach was
    utlimately revised in denote.git courtesy of a change by
    Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay in pull request 661:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote/pull/661>.


##### `denote-markdown` version 0.3.0

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote-markdown`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-markdown>
-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-markdown>
-   Backronyms: Denote&hellip; Markdown&rsquo;s Ambitious Reimplimentations
    Knowingly Dilute Obvious Widespread Norms; Denote&hellip; Markup
    Agnosticism Requires Knowhow to Do Only What&rsquo;s Necessary.

-   The package defines a `markdown-obsidian` file type which can be
    used by relevant note-creating commands, such as `denote` or the
    convenience wrapper `denote-type`. This file type is updated to be
    more robust, in accordance with some changes in core Denote (I am
    not even documenting those, as they are not intended for users).


##### `denote-org` version 0.3.0

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote-org`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-org>
-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-org>
-   Backronym: Denote&hellip; Ordinarily Restricts Gyrations.

-   The command `denote-org-link-to-heading` now supports linking to the
    current file when called with a prefix argument. This way, a file
    can have links between its headings. Thanks to Tonus for pointing
    out that it was impossible to create a link inside the current file.
    This was done in issue 17: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-org/issues/17>.

-   A helper function for retrieving the backlinks of a heading is
    updated to return full file paths. Thanks to Vedang Manerikar for
    the contribution in pull request 20: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-org/pull/20>.
    Vedang has assigned copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   Another helper function is updated to conform with changes to core
    Denote with regard to how the `denote-link-description-format` is
    handled. Thanks to Jung Han for reporting the bug in issue 21:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-org/issues/21>.


##### `denote-silo` version 0.3.0

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote-silo`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-silo>
-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-silo>
-   Backronym: Denote&hellip; Silos Insulate Localised Objects.

The minibuffer prompt for silo directories uses the corrent completion
category (consistent with what I mentioned above about completion
metadata). Thanks to Wilf-bog for reporting an error with the
completion prompt in issue 1: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-silo/issues/1>.


##### `denote-sequence` version 0.3.0

-   Package name (GNU ELPA): `denote-sequence`
-   Official manual: <https://protesilaos.com/emacs/denote-sequence>
-   Git repository: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence>
-   Backronym: Denote&hellip; Sequences Efficiently Queue Unsorted Entries
    Notwithstanding Curation Efforts.

This package deserved its own release notes, as I did a lot of work on
it. But as this file is already long, I will focus on the essentials:

-   The `denote-sequence-scheme` used to support a `numeric` and
    `alphanumeric` option. There now is a third one called
    `alphanumeric-delimited`. It combines features from the other two
    and may be better suited for especially long/intricate sequences.

-   The `denote-sequence-reparent` command now works recursively to
    produce the desired consequences to all descendants of a given
    sequence note. Thanks to Peter Prevos for the contribution in pull
    request 13, which further changes by me:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence/pull/13>.

-   The command `denote-sequence-view-hierarchy` produces a bespoke
    buffer with all the sequence notes that form a hierarchy. The buffer
    displays file titles, the concomitant sequence, and file keywords.
    Each level of depth is expressed by a number of spaces, controlled
    by the user option `denote-sequence-hierarchy-indentation`. In the
    hierarchy buffer, there are commands that move to the next/previous
    item, or forward/backward at the same level of depth. `RET` opens
    the file at point, `TAB` folds/unfolds the tree. The user option
    `denote-sequence-hierarchy-move-and-open` controls whether motion
    commands should automatically open the file, which by default
    happens in the other window (users who modify the variable
    `denote-open-link-function` will get the specified behaviour in this
    context as well). The `denote-sequence-view-hierarchy` can be called
    with one or two prefix arguments to limit to a given sequence prefix
    and/or level of depth (something that `denote-sequence-dired` also
    supports). In short, this is a way to visualise your sequence notes
    in a buffer that has a different presentation than Dired.

-   Thanks to alan-w-255 for renaming and refining a prompt that is also
    used in the hierarchy feature. This was done in pull request 15:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence/pull/15>. The change
    is small, meaning that its author does not need to assign copyright
    to the Free Software Foundation. Further refinements by me.

-   Thanks to Nicolas Semrau for binding `q` to `quit-window` in the
    `denote-sequence-hierarchy-mode-map`. This was done in pull request
    20: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence/pull/20>. The
    change is small, meaning that Nicolas does not need to assign
    copyright to the Free Software Foundation.

-   The `denote-sequence-file-prompt-extra-metadata` is the functional
    equivalent of the aforementioned `denote-file-prompt-extra-metadata`.

-   Thanks to liyingzhi for pointing out an inaccurate comment in the
    docstring of `denote-sequence-scheme`. This was done in issue 18:
    <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence/issues/18>.

-   The `denote-sequence-dired` is updated to align with the modalities
    of `denote-dired`, as noted above. Thanks to juh for reminding me
    about the need for changes in issue 14: <https://github.com/protesilaos/denote-sequence/issues/14>.

-   Thanks to Stefan Monnier for pointing out a stylistic mistake in an
    older version of `denote-sequence-dired`. This was done on the
    emacs-devel mailing list: <https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2025-11/msg01119.html>.
    Also thanks to Stefan for telling me about some other compiler
    warnings: <https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2025-11/msg01119.html>.


#### Git commits

    ~/Git/Projects/denote $ git shortlog 4.1.0..4.2.0 --summary --numbered
       184	Protesilaos
         4	duli
         3	Jean-Philippe Gagné Guay
         3	Matthew Batson
         2	alvmts
         2	gnuhack
         1	Alvin Hsu
         1	Matto Fransen
         1	Samuel W. Flint
         1	Tobias Lidman-Strauss
         1	bplubell
         1	gvalson
         1	nescias
